<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III: A Pilgrim’s Progress</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">A Pilgrim’s Progress</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Through the bars I looked into that little and dirty lane whereby I had entered; in which a sentinel, gun on shoulder, and with a huge revolver strapped at his hip, monotonously moved. On my right was an old wall overwhelmed with moss. A few growths stemmed from its crevices. Their leaves were of a refreshing colour. I felt singularly happy, and carefully throwing myself on the bare planks sang one after another all the French songs which I had picked up in my stay at the ambulance; sang <i xml:lang="fr">La Madelon</i>, sang <i xml:lang="fr"><strong>Av</strong>ec av<strong>ec Du</strong></i>, and <i xml:lang="fr">Les Galiots Sont Lourds Dans Sac</i>⁠—concluding with an inspired rendering of <i xml:lang="fr">La Marseillaise</i>, at which the guard (who had several times stopped his round in what I choose to interpret as astonishment) grounded arms and swore appreciatively. Various officials of the jail passed by me and my lusty songs; I cared no whit. Two or three conferred, pointing in my direction, and I sang a little louder for the benefit of their perplexity. Finally out of voice I stopped.</p>
			<p>It was twilight.</p>
			<p>As I lay on my back luxuriously, I saw through the bars of my twice padlocked door a boy and a girl about ten years old. I saw them climb on the wall and play together, obliviously and exquisitely, in the darkening air. I watched them for many minutes; till the last moment of light failed; till they and the wall itself dissolved in a common mystery, leaving only the bored silhouette of the soldier moving imperceptibly and wearily against a still more gloomy piece of autumn sky.</p>
			<p>At last I knew that I was very thirsty; and leaping up began to clamor at my bars. “Something to drink, please.” After a long debate with the sergeant of guards who said very angrily: “Give it to him,” a guard took my request and disappeared from view, returning with a more heavily armed guard and a tin cup full of water. One of these gentry watched the water and me, while the other wrestled with the padlock. The door being minutely opened, one guard and the water painfully entered. The other guard remained at the door, gun in readiness. The water was set down, and the enterer assumed a perpendicular position which I thought merited recognition; accordingly I said “<i xml:lang="fr">Merci</i>” politely, without getting up from the planks. Immediately he began to deliver a sharp lecture on the probability of my using the tin cup to saw my way out; and commended haste in no doubtful terms. I smiled, asked pardon for my inherent stupidity (which speech seemed to anger him) and guzzled the so-called water without looking at it, having learned something from Noyon. With a long and dangerous look at their prisoner, the gentlemen of the guard withdrew, using inconceivable caution in the relocking of the door.</p>
			<p>I laughed and fell asleep.</p>
			<p>After (as I judged) four minutes of slumber, I was awakened by at least six men standing over me. The darkness was intense, it was extraordinarily cold. I glared at them and tried to understand what new crime I had committed. One of the six was repeating: “Get up, you are going away. Four o’clock.” After several attempts I got up. They formed a circle around me; and together we marched a few steps to a sort of storeroom, where my great sack, small sack, and overcoat were handed to me. A rather agreeably voiced guard then handed me a half-cake of chocolate, saying (but with a tolerable grimness): “You’ll need it, believe me.” I found my stick, at which “piece of furniture” they amused themselves a little until I showed its use, by catching the ring at the mouth of my sack in the curved end of the stick and swinging the whole business unaided on my back. Two new guards⁠—or rather gendarmes⁠—were now officially put in charge of my person; and the three of us passed down the lane, much to the interest of the sentinel, to whom I bade a vivid and unreturned adieu. I can see him perfectly as he stares stupidly at us, a queer shape in the gloom, before turning on his heel.</p>
			<p>Toward the very station whereat some hours since I had disembarked with the Belgian deserter and my former escorts, we moved. I was stiff with cold and only half awake, but peculiarly thrilled. The gendarmes on either side moved grimly, without speaking; or returning monosyllables to my few questions. Yes, we were to take the train. I was going somewhere, then? “<i xml:lang="fr">B’en sûr.</i>”⁠—“Where?”⁠—“You will know in time.”</p>
			<p>After a few minutes we reached the station, which I failed to recognize. The yellow flares of lamps, huge and formless in the night mist, some figures moving to and fro on a little platform, a rustle of conversation: everything seemed ridiculously suppressed, beautifully abnormal, deliciously insane. Every figure was wrapped with its individual ghostliness; a number of ghosts each out on his own promenade, yet each for some reason selecting this unearthly patch of the world, this putrescent and uneasy gloom. Even my guards talked in whispers. “Watch him, I’ll see about the train.” So one went off into the mist. I leaned dizzily against the wall nearest me (having plumped down my baggage) and stared into the darkness at my elbow, filled with talking shadows. I recognized <i xml:lang="fr">officiers anglais</i> wandering helplessly up and down, supported with their sticks; French lieutenants talking to each other here and there; the extraordinary sense-bereft station master at a distance looking like a cross between a jumping-jack and a goblin; knots of <i xml:lang="fr">permissionnaires</i> cursing wearily or joking hopelessly with one another or stalking back and forth with imprecatory gesticulations. “It’s a joke, too, you know, there are no more trains?”⁠—“The conductor is dead. I know his sister.”⁠—“Old chap, I am all in.”⁠—“Say, we are all lost.”⁠—“What time is it?”⁠—“My dear fellow, there is no more time, the French Government forbids it.” Suddenly burst out of the loquacious opacity a dozen handfuls of Algériens, their feet swaggering with fatigue, their eyes burning, apparently by themselves⁠—faceless in the equally black mist. By threes and fives they assaulted the goblin who wailed and shook his withered fist in their faces. There was no train. It had been taken away by the French Government. “How do I know how the poilus can get back to their regiments on time? Of course you’ll all of you be deserters, but is it my fault?” (I thought of my friend, the Belgian, at this moment lying in a pen at the prison which I had just quitted by some miracle.)⁠ ⁠… One of these fine people from uncivilized, ignorant, unwarlike Algeria was drunk and knew it, as did two of his very fine friends who announced that as there was no train he should have a good sleep at a farmhouse hard by, which farmhouse one of them claimed to espy through the impenetrable night. The drunk was accordingly escorted into the dark, his friends’ abrupt steps correcting his own large slovenly procedure out of earshot.⁠ ⁠… Some of the Black People sat down near me and smoked. Their enormous faces, wads of vital darkness, swooned with fatigue. Their vast gentle hands lay noisily about their knees.</p>
			<p>The departed gendarme returned, with a bump, out of the mist. The train for Paris would arrive <i xml:lang="fr">de suite</i>. We were just in time, our movement had so far been very creditable. All was well. It was cold, eh?</p>
			<p>Then with the ghastly miniature roar of an insane toy the train for Paris came fumbling into the station.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>We boarded it, due caution being taken that I should not escape. As a matter of fact I held up the would-be passengers for nearly a minute by my unaided attempts to boost my uncouth baggage aboard. Then my captors and I blundered heavily into a compartment in which an Englishman and two French women were seated. My gendarmes established themselves on either side of the door, a process which woke up the Anglo-Saxon and caused a brief gap in the low talk of the women. Jolt⁠—we were off.</p>
			<p>I find myself with a <i xml:lang="fr">française</i> on my left and an <i xml:lang="fr">anglais</i> on my right. The latter has already uncomprehendingly subsided into sleep. The former (a woman of about thirty) is talking pleasantly to her friend, whom I face. She must have been very pretty before she put on the black. Her friend is also a <i xml:lang="fr">veuve</i>. How pleasantly they talk, of <i xml:lang="fr">la guerre</i>, of Paris, of the bad service; talk in agreeably modulated voices, leaning a little forward to each other, not wishing to disturb the dolt at my right. The train tears slowly on. Both the gendarmes are asleep, one with his hand automatically grasping the handle of the door. Lest I escape. I try all sorts of positions, for I find myself very tired. The best is to put my cane between my legs and rest my chin on it; but even that is uncomfortable, for the Englishman has writhed all over me by this time and is snoring creditably. I look him over; an Etonian, as I guess. Certain well-bred-well-fedness. Except for the position⁠—well, <i xml:lang="fr">c’est la guerre</i>. The women are speaking softly. “And do you know, my dear, that they had raids again in Paris? My sister wrote me.”⁠—“One has excitement always in a great city, my dear.”⁠—</p>
			<p>Bump, slowing down. <strong>Bump⁠—bump.</strong></p>
			<p>It is light outside. One sees the world. There is a world still, the <i xml:lang="fr">gouvernement français</i> has not taken it away, and the air must be beautifully cool. In the compartment it is hot. The gendarmes smell worst. I know how I smell. What polite women.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Enfin, nous voilà.</i>” My guards awoke and yawned pretentiously. Lest I should think they had dozed off. It is Paris.</p>
			<p>Some <i xml:lang="fr">permissionaires</i> cried “Paris.” The woman across from me said “Paris, Paris.” A great shout came up from every insane drowsy brain that had travelled with us⁠—a fierce and beautiful cry, which went the length of the train.⁠ ⁠… Paris, where one forgets, Paris, which is Pleasure, Paris, in whom our souls live, Paris, the beautiful, Paris at last.</p>
			<p>The Englishman woke up and said heavily to me: “I say, where are we?”⁠—“Paris,” I answered, walking carefully on his feet as I made my baggage-laden way out of the compartment. It was Paris.</p>
			<p>My guards hurried me through the station. One of them (I saw for the first time) was older than the other, and rather handsome with his Van Dyck blackness of curly beard. He said that it was too early for the metro, it was closed. We should take a car. It would bring us to the other station from which our next train left. We should hurry. We emerged from the station and its crowds of crazy men. We boarded a car marked something. The conductress, a strong, pink-cheeked, rather beautiful girl in black, pulled my baggage in for me with a gesture which filled all of me with joy. I thanked her, and she smiled at me. The car moved along through the morning.</p>
			<p>We descended from it. We started off on foot. The car was not the right car. We would have to walk to the station. I was faint and almost dead from weariness and I stopped when my overcoat had fallen from my benumbed arm for the second time: “How far is it?” The older gendarme returned briefly, “Twenty minutes.” I said to him: “Will you help me carry these things?” He thought, and told the younger to carry my small sack filled with papers. The latter grunted, “<i xml:lang="fr">C’est défendu.</i>” We went a little farther, and I broke down again. I stopped dead, and said: “I can’t go any farther.” It was obvious to my escorts that I couldn’t, so I didn’t trouble to elucidate. Moreover, I was past elucidation.</p>
			<p>The older stroked his beard. “Well,” he said, “would you care to take a cab?” I merely looked at him. “If you wish to call a cab, I will take out of your money, which I have here and which I must not give to you, the necessary sum, and make a note of it, subtracting from the original amount a sufficiency for our fare to the Gare. In that case we will not walk to the Gare, we will in fact ride.” “Please,” was all I found to reply to this eloquence.</p>
			<p>Several empty cabs had gone by during the peroration of the law, and no more seemed to offer themselves. After some minutes, however, one appeared and was duly hailed. Nervously (he was shy in the big city) the older asked if the driver knew where the Gare was. “<i xml:lang="fr">Laquelle?</i>” demanded the <i xml:lang="fr">cocher</i> angrily. And when he was told⁠—“Of course, I know, why not?” We got in; I being directed to sit in the middle, and my two bags and fur coat piled on top of us all.</p>
			<p>So we drove through the streets in the freshness of the full morning, the streets full of a few divine people who stared at me and nudged one another, the streets of Paris⁠ ⁠… the drowsy ways wakening at the horses’ hoofs, the people lifting their faces to stare.</p>
			<p>We arrived at the Gare, and I recognized it vaguely. Was it D’Orléans? We dismounted, and the tremendous transaction of the fare was apparently very creditably accomplished by the older. The <i xml:lang="fr">cocher</i> gave me a look and remarked whatever it is Paris drivers remark to Paris cab horses, pulling dully at the reins. We entered the station and I collapsed comfortably on a bench; the younger, seating himself with enormous pomposity at my side, adjusted his tunic with a purely feminine gesture expressive at once of pride and nervousness. Gradually my vision gained in focus. The station has a good many people in it. The number increases momently. A great many are girls. I am in a new world⁠—a world of chic femininity. My eyes devour the inimitable details of costume, the inexpressible nuances of pose, the indescribable démarche of the midinette. They hold themselves differently. They have even a little bold color here and there on skirt or blouse or hat. They are not talking about <i xml:lang="fr">La Guerre</i>. Incredible. They appear very beautiful, these Parisiennes.</p>
			<p>And simultaneously with my appreciation of the crisp persons about me comes the hitherto unacknowledged appreciation of my uncouthness. My chin tells my hand of a good quarter inch of beard, every hair of it stiff with dirt. I can feel the dirt-pools under my eyes. My hands are rough with dirt. My uniform is smeared and creased in a hundred thousand directions. My puttees and shoes are prehistoric in appearance.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>My first request was permission to visit the <i xml:lang="fr">vespasienne</i>. The younger didn’t wish to assume any unnecessary responsibilities; I should wait till the older returned. There he was now. I might ask him. The older benignly granted my petition, nodding significantly to his fellow-guard, by whom I was accordingly escorted to my destination and subsequently back to my bench. When we got back the gendarmes held a consultation of terrific importance; in substance, the train which should be leaving at that moment (six something) did not run today. We should therefore wait for the next train, which leaves at twelve-something-else. Then the older surveyed me and said almost kindly: “How would you like a cup of coffee?”⁠—“Much,” I replied sincerely enough.⁠—“Come with me,” he commanded, resuming instantly his official manner. “And you” (to the younger) “watch his baggage.”</p>
			<p>Of all the very beautiful women whom I had seen the most very beautiful was the large and circular lady who sold a cup of perfectly hot and genuine coffee for two cents, just on the brink of the station, chatting cheerfully with her many customers. Of all the drinks I ever drank, hers was the most sacredly delicious. She wore, I remember, a tight black dress in which enormous and benignant breasts bulged and sank continuously. I lingered over my tiny cup, watching her swift big hands, her round nodding face, her large sudden smile. I drank two coffees, and insisted that my money should pay for our drinks. Of all the treating which I shall ever do, the treating of my captor will stand unique in pleasure. Even he half appreciated the sense of humor involved; though his dignity did not permit a visible acknowledgment thereof.</p>
			<p><i xml:lang="fr">Madame la vendeuse de café</i>, I shall remember you for more than a little while.</p>
			<p>Having thus consummated breakfast, my guardian suggested a walk. Agreed. I felt I had the strength of ten because the coffee was pure. Moreover it would be a novelty to <i xml:lang="fr">me promener sans</i> 150-odd pounds of baggage. We set out.</p>
			<p>As we walked easily and leisurely the by this time well peopled streets of the vicinity, my guard indulged himself in pleasant conversation. Did I know Paris much? He knew it all. But he had not been in Paris for several (eight was it?) years. It was a fine place, a large city to be sure. But always changing. I had spent a month in Paris while waiting for my uniform and my assignment to a <i xml:lang="fr">section sanitaire</i>? And my friend was with me? H-mmm-mm.</p>
			<p>A perfectly typical runt of a Paris bull eyed us. The older saluted him with infinite respect, the respect of a shabby rube deacon for a well-dressed burglar. They exchanged a few well-chosen words, in French of course. “What ya got there?”⁠—“An American.”⁠—“What’s wrong with him?”⁠—“H-mmm” mysterious shrug of the shoulders followed by a whisper in the ear of the city thug. The latter contented himself with “Ha-aaa”⁠—plus a look at me which was meant to wipe me off the earth’s face (I pretended to be studying the morning meanwhile). Then we moved on, followed by ferocious stares from the Paris bull. Evidently I was getting to be more of a criminal every minute; I should probably be shot tomorrow, not (as I had assumed erroneously) the day after. I drank the morning with renewed vigor, thanking heaven for the coffee, Paris; and feeling complete confidence in myself. I should make a great speech (in Midi French). I should say to the firing squad: “Gentlemen, <i xml:lang="fr">c’est de la blague, tu sais? Moi, je connais la soeur du conducteur.</i>”⁠ ⁠… They would ask me when I preferred to die. I should reply, “Pardon me, you wish to ask me when I prefer to become immortal?” I should answer: “What matter? It’s all the same to me, because there isn’t any more time⁠—the French Government forbids it.”</p>
			<p>My laughter surprised the older considerably. He would have been more astonished had I yielded to the well-nigh irrepressible inclination, which at the moment suffused me, to clap him heartily upon the back.</p>
			<p>Everything was blague. The driver, the café, the police, the morning, and least and last the excellent French Government.</p>
			<p>We had walked for a half hour or more. My guide and protector now inquired of a workingman the location of the <i xml:lang="fr">boucheries</i>? “There is one right in front of you,” he was told. Sure enough, not a block away. I laughed again. It was eight years all right.</p>
			<p>The older bought a great many things in the next five minutes: sausage, cheese, bread, chocolate, <i xml:lang="fr">pinard rouge</i>. A bourgeoise with an unagreeable face and suspicion of me written in headlines all over her mouth served us with quick hard laconicisms of movement. I hated her and consequently refused my captor’s advice to buy a little of everything (on the ground that it would be a long time till the next meal), contenting myself with a cake of chocolate⁠—rather bad chocolate, but nothing to what I was due to eat during the next three months. Then we retraced our steps, arriving at the station after several mistakes and inquiries, to find the younger faithfully keeping guard over my two <i xml:lang="fr">sacs</i> and overcoat.</p>
			<p>The older and I sat down, and the younger took his turn at promenading. I got up to buy a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Fantasio</i> at the stand ten steps away, and the older jumped up and escorted me to and from it. I think I asked him what he would read? and he said “Nothing.” Maybe I bought him a journal. So we waited, eyed by everyone in the Gare, laughed at by the officers and their <i xml:lang="fr">marraines</i>, pointed at by sinewy dames and decrepit <i xml:lang="fr">bonhommes</i>⁠—the centre of amusement for the whole station. In spite of my reading I felt distinctly uncomfortable. Would it never be Twelve? Here comes the younger, neat as a pin, looking fairly sterilized. He sits down on my left. Watches are ostentatiously consulted. It is time. <i xml:lang="fr">En avant.</i> I sling myself under my bags.</p>
			<p>“Where are we going now?” I asked the older. Curling the tips of his mustachios, he replied, “Mah-say.”</p>
			<p>Marseilles! I was happy once more. I had always wanted to go to that great port of the Mediterranean, where one has new colors and strange customs, and where the people sing when they talk. But how extraordinary to have come to Paris⁠—and what a trip lay before us. I was much muddled about the whole thing. Probably I was to be deported. But why from Marseilles? Where was Marseilles anyway? I was probably all wrong about its location. Who cared, after all? At least we were leaving the pointings and the sneers and the half-suppressed titters.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Two fat and respectable <i xml:lang="fr">bonhommes</i>, the two gendarmes, and I, made up one compartment. The former talked an animated stream, the guards and I were on the whole silent. I watched the liquidating landscape and dozed happily. The gendarmes dozed, one at each door. The train rushed lazily across the earth, between farmhouses, into fields, along woods⁠ ⁠… the sunlight smacked my eye and cuffed my sleepy mind with colour.</p>
			<p>I was awakened by a noise of eating. My protectors, knife in hand, were consuming their meat and bread, occasionally tilting their <i xml:lang="fr">bidons</i> on high and absorbing the thin streams which spurted therefrom. I tried a little chocolate. The <i xml:lang="fr">bonhommes</i> were already busy with their repast. The older gendarme watched me chewing away at the chocolate, then commanded, “Take some bread.” This astonished me, I confessed, beyond anything which had heretofore occurred. I gazed mutely at him, wondering whether the <i xml:lang="fr">gouvernement français</i> had made away with his wits. He had relaxed amazingly: his cap lay beside him, his tunic was unbuttoned, he slouched in a completely undisciplined posture⁠—his face seemed to have been changed for a peasant’s, it was almost open in expression and almost completely at ease. I seized the offered hunk, and chewed vigorously on it. Bread was bread. The older appeared pleased with my appetite; his face softened still more, as he remarked: “Bread without wine doesn’t taste good,” and proffered his <i xml:lang="fr">bidon</i>. I drank as much as I dared, and thanked him: “<i xml:lang="fr">Ça va mieux.</i>” The pinard went straight to my brain, I felt my mind cuddled by a pleasant warmth, my thoughts became invested with a great contentment. The train stopped; and the younger sprang out, carrying the empty canteens of himself and his comrade. When they and he returned, I enjoyed another cup. From that moment till we reached our destination at about eight o’clock the older and I got on extraordinarily well. When the gentlemen descended at their station he waxed almost familiar. I was in excellent spirits; rather drunk; extremely tired. Now that the two guardians and myself were alone in the compartment, the curiosity which had hitherto been stifled by etiquette and pride of capture came rapidly to light. Why was I here, anyway? I seemed well enough to them.⁠—Because my friend had written some letters, I told them.⁠—But I had done nothing myself?⁠—I explained that we used to be together all the time, <i xml:lang="fr">mon ami et moi</i>; that was the only reason which I knew of.⁠—It was very funny to see how this explanation improved matters. The older in particular was immensely relieved.⁠—I would without doubt, he said, be set free immediately upon my arrival. The French government didn’t keep people like me in prison.⁠—They fired some questions about America at me, to which I imaginatively replied. I think I told the younger that the average height of buildings in America was nine hundred metres. He stared and shook his head doubtfully, but I convinced him in the end. Then in my turn I asked questions, the first being: Where was my friend?⁠—It seems that my friend had left Gré (or whatever it was) the morning of the day I had entered it.⁠—Did they know where my friend was going?⁠—They couldn’t say. They had been told that he was very dangerous.⁠—So we talked on and on: How long had I studied French? I spoke very well. Was it hard to learn English?⁠—</p>
			<p>Yet when I climbed out to relieve myself by the roadside one of them was at my heels.</p>
			<p>Finally watches were consulted, tunics buttoned, hats donned. I was told in a gruff voice to prepare myself; that we were approaching the end of our journey. Looking at the erstwhile participants in conversation, I scarcely knew them. They had put on with their caps a positive ferocity of bearing. I began to think that I had dreamed the incidents of the preceding hours.</p>
			<p>We descended at a minute, dirty station which possessed the air of having been dropped by mistake from the bung of the <i xml:lang="fr">gouvernement français</i>. The older sought out the station master, who having nothing to do was taking a siesta in a miniature waiting-room. The general countenance of the place was exceedingly depressing; but I attempted to keep up my spirits with the reflection that after all all this was but a junction, and that from here we were to take a train for Marseilles herself. The name of the station, Briouse, I found somewhat dreary. And now the older returned with the news that our train wasn’t running today, and that the next train didn’t arrive till early morning and should we walk to Marseilles? I could check my great <i xml:lang="fr">sac</i> and overcoat. The small <i xml:lang="fr">sac</i> I should carry along⁠—it was only a step, after all.</p>
			<p>With a glance at the desolation of Briouse I agreed to the stroll. It was a fine night for a little promenade; not too cool, and with a promise of a moon stuck into the sky. The <i xml:lang="fr">sac</i> and coat were accordingly checked by the older; the station master glanced at me and haughtily grunted (having learned that I was an American); and my protectors and I set out.</p>
			<p>I insisted that we stop at the first café and have some wine on me. To this my escorts agreed, making me go ten paces ahead of them, and waiting until I was through before stepping up to the bar⁠—not from politeness, to be sure, but because (as I soon gathered) gendarmes were not any too popular in this part of the world, and the sight of two gendarmes with a prisoner might inspire the habitués to attempt a rescue. Furthermore, on leaving the café (a desolate place if I ever saw one, with a fearful <i xml:lang="fr">patronne</i>) I was instructed sharply to keep close to them but on no account to place myself between them, there being sundry villagers to be encountered before we struck the high road for Marseilles. Thanks to their forethought and my obedience the rescue did not take place, nor did our party excite even the curiosity of the scarce and soggy inhabitants of the unlovely town of Briouse.</p>
			<p>The high road won, all of us relaxed considerably. The <i xml:lang="fr">sac</i> full of suspicious letters which I bore on my shoulder was not so light as I had thought, but the kick of the Briouse pinard thrust me forward at a good clip. The road was absolutely deserted; the night hung loosely around it, here and there tattered by attempting moonbeams. I was somewhat sorry to find the way hilly, and in places bad underfoot; yet the unknown adventure lying before me, and the delicious silence of the night (in which our words rattled queerly like tin soldiers in a plush-lined box) boosted me into a condition of mysterious happiness. We talked, the older and I, of strange subjects. As I suspected, he had been not always a gendarme. He had seen service among the Arabs. He had always liked languages and had picked up Arabian with great ease⁠—of this he was very proud. For instance⁠—the Arabian way of saying “Give me to eat” was this; when you wanted wine you said so-and-so; “Nice day” was something else. He thought I could pick it up inasmuch as I had done so creditably with French. He was absolutely certain that English was much easier to learn than French, and would not be moved. Now what was the American language like? I explained that it was a sort of Argot-English. When I gave him some phrases he was astonished⁠—“It sounds like English!” he cried, and retailed his stock of English phrases for my approval. I tried hard to get his intonation of the Arabian, and he helped me on the difficult sounds. America must be a strange place, he thought.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>After two hours walking he called a halt, bidding us rest. We all lay flat on the grass by the roadside. The moon was still battling with clouds. The darkness of the fields on either side was total. I crawled on hands and knees to the sound of silver-trickling water and found a little spring-fed stream. Prone, weight on elbows, I drank heavily of its perfect blackness. It was icy, talkative, minutely alive.</p>
			<p>The older presently gave a perfunctory “<i xml:lang="fr">alors</i>”; we got up; I hoisted my suspicious utterances upon my shoulder, which recognized the renewal of hostilities with a neuralgic throb. I banged forward with bigger and bigger feet. A bird, scared, swooped almost into my face. Occasionally some night-noise pricked a futile, minute hole in the enormous curtain of soggy darkness. Uphill now. Every muscle thoroughly aching, head spinning, I half-straightened my no longer obedient body; and jumped: face to face with a little wooden man hanging all by itself in a grove of low trees.</p>
			<p>—The wooden body, clumsy with pain, burst into fragile legs with absurdly large feet and funny writhing toes; its little stiff arms made abrupt cruel equal angles with the road. About its stunted loins clung a ponderous and jocular fragment of drapery. On one terribly brittle shoulder the droll lump of its neckless head ridiculously lived. There was in this complete silent doll a gruesome truth of instinct, a success of uncanny poignancy, an unearthly ferocity of rectangular emotion.</p>
			<p>For perhaps a minute the almost obliterated face and mine eyed one another in the silence of intolerable autumn.</p>
			<p>Who was this wooden man? Like a sharp black mechanical cry in the spongy organism of gloom stood the coarse and sudden sculpture of his torment; the big mouth of night carefully spurted the angular actual language of his martyred body. I had seen him before in the dream of some medieval saint, with a thief sagging at either side, surrounded with crisp angels. Tonight he was alone; save for myself, and the moon’s minute flower pushing between slabs of fractured cloud.</p>
			<p>I was wrong, the moon and I and he were not alone.⁠ ⁠… A glance up the road gave me two silhouettes at pause. The gendarmes were waiting. I must hurry to catch up or incur suspicions by my sloth. I hastened forward, with a last look over my shoulder⁠ ⁠… the wooden man was watching us.</p>
			<p>When I came abreast of them, expecting abuse, I was surprised by the older’s saying quietly “We haven’t far to go,” and plunging forward imperturbably into the night.</p>
			<p>Nor had we gone a half hour before several dark squat forms confronted us: houses. I decided that I did not like houses⁠—particularly as now my guardian’s manner abruptly changed; once more tunics were buttoned, holsters adjusted, and myself directed to walk between and keep always up with the others. Now the road became thoroughly afflicted with houses, houses not, however, so large and lively as I had expected from my dreams of Marseilles. Indeed we seemed to be entering an extremely small and rather disagreeable town. I ventured to ask what its name was. “Mah-say” was the response. By this I was fairly puzzled. However the street led us to a square, and I saw the towers of a church sitting in the sky; between them the round, yellow, big moon looked immensely and peacefully conscious⁠ ⁠… no one was stirring in the little streets, all the houses were keeping the moon’s secret.</p>
			<p>We walked on.</p>
			<p>I was too tired to think. I merely felt the town as a unique unreality. What was it? I knew⁠—the moon’s picture of a town. These streets with their houses did not exist, they were but a ludicrous projection of the moon’s sumptuous personality. This was a city of Pretend, created by the hypnotism of moonlight.⁠—Yet when I examined the moon she too seemed but a painting of a moon and the sky in which she lived a fragile echo of colour. If I blew hard the whole shy mechanism would collapse gently with a neat soundless crash. I must not, or lose all.</p>
			<p>We turned a corner, then another. My guides conferred concerning the location of something, I couldn’t make out what. Then the older nodded in the direction of a long dull dirty mass not a hundred yards away, which (as near as I could see) served either as a church or a tomb. Toward this we turned. All too soon I made out its entirely dismal exterior. Grey long stone walls, surrounded on the street side by a fence of ample proportions and uniformly dull colour. Now I perceived that we made toward a gate, singularly narrow and forbidding, in the grey long wall. No living soul appeared to inhabit this desolation.</p>
			<p>The older rang at the gate. A gendarme with a revolver answered his ring; and presently he was admitted, leaving the younger and myself to wait. And now I began to realize that this was the gendarmerie of the town, into which for safekeeping I was presently to be inducted for the night. My heart sank, I confess, at the thought of sleeping in the company of that species of humanity which I had come to detest beyond anything in hell or on earth. Meanwhile the doorman had returned with the older, and I was bidden roughly enough to pick up my baggage and march. I followed my guides down a corridor, up a staircase, and into a dark, small room where a candle was burning. Dazzled by the light and dizzied by the fatigue of my ten or twelve mile stroll, I let my baggage go; and leaned against a convenient wall, trying to determine who was now my tormentor.</p>
			<p>Facing me at a table stood a man of about my own height, and, as I should judge, about forty years old. His face was seedy sallow and long. He had bushy semicircular eyebrows which drooped so much as to reduce his eyes to mere blinking slits. His cheeks were so furrowed that they leaned inward. He had no nose, properly speaking, but a large beak of preposterous widthlessness, which gave his whole face the expression of falling gravely downstairs, and quite obliterated the unimportant chin. His mouth was made of two long uncertain lips which twitched nervously. His cropped black hair was rumpled; his blouse, from which hung a croix de guerre, unbuttoned; and his unputteed shanks culminated in bed-slippers. In physique he reminded me a little of Ichabod Crane. His neck was exactly like a hen’s: I felt sure that when he drank he must tilt his head back as hens do in order that the liquid may run down their throats. But his method of keeping himself upright, together with certain spasmodic contractions of his fingers and the nervous “uh-ah, uh-ah” which punctuated his insecure phrases like uncertain commas, combined to offer the suggestion of a rooster; a rather moth-eaten rooster, which took itself tremendously seriously and was showing off to an imaginary group of admiring hens situated somewhere in the background of his consciousness.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Vous êtes, uh-ah, l’Am-é-ri-cain?</i>”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Je suis Américain</i>,” I admitted.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Eh-bi-en uh-ah uh-ah</i>⁠—We were expecting you.” He surveyed me with great interest.</p>
			<p>Behind this seedy and restless personage I noted his absolute likeness, adorning one of the walls. The rooster was faithfully depicted à la Rembrandt at half-length in the stirring guise of a fencer, foil in hand, and wearing enormous gloves. The execution of this masterpiece left something to be desired; but the whole betokened a certain spirit and verve, on the part of the sitter, which I found difficulty in attributing to the being before me.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Vous êtes uh-ah <strong>Kew-Mangz</strong>?</i>”</p>
			<p>“What?” I said, completely baffled by this extraordinary dissyllable.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Comprenez vous fran-çais?</i>”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Un peu.</i>”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Bon. Alors, vous vous ap-pel-lez <strong>Kew Mangz</strong>, n’est-ce pas? Edouard <strong>Kew-Mangz</strong>?</i>”</p>
			<p>“Oh,” I said, relieved, “yes.” It was really amazing, the way he writhed around the <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">G</i>.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Comment ça se prononce en anglais?</i>”</p>
			<p>I told him.</p>
			<p>He replied benevolently, somewhat troubled “uh-ah uh-ah uh-ah⁠—why are you here, <strong>Kew-Mangz</strong>?”</p>
			<p>At this question I was for one moment angrier than I had ever before been in all my life. Then I realized the absurdity of the situation, and laughed.⁠—“<i xml:lang="fr">Sais pas.</i>”</p>
			<p>The questionnaire continued:</p>
			<p>“You were in the Red Cross?”⁠—“Surely, in the Norton Harjes Ambulance, <i xml:lang="fr">Section Sanitaire Vingt-et-Un</i>.”⁠—“You had a friend there?”⁠—“Naturally.”⁠—“<i xml:lang="fr">Il a écrit, votre ami, des bêtises, n’est ce pas?</i>”⁠—“So they told me. <i xml:lang="fr">N’en sais rien.</i>”⁠—“What sort of person was your friend?”⁠—“He was a magnificent person, always <i xml:lang="fr">très gentil</i> with me.”⁠—(With a queer pucker the fencer remarked) “Your friend got you into a lot of trouble, though.”⁠—(To which I replied with a broad grin) “<i xml:lang="fr">N’importe</i>, we are <i xml:lang="fr">camarades</i>.”</p>
			<p>A stream of puzzled uh-ahs followed this reply. The fencer, or rooster or whatever he might be, finally, picking up the lamp and the lock, said: “<i xml:lang="fr">Alors, viens avec moi, <strong>Kew-Mangz</strong>.</i>” I started to pick up the <i xml:lang="fr">sac</i>, but he told me it would be kept in the office (we being in the office). I said I had checked a large <i xml:lang="fr">sac</i> and my fur overcoat at Briouse, and he assured me they would be sent on by train. He now dismissed the gendarmes, who had been listening curiously to the examination. As I was conducted from the <i xml:lang="fr">bureau</i> I asked him point-blank: “How long am I to stay here?”⁠—to which he answered “<i xml:lang="fr">Oh, peut-être un jour, deux jours, je ne sais pas.</i>”</p>
			<p>Two days in a gendarmerie would be enough, I thought. We marched out.</p>
			<p>Behind me the bedslippered rooster uhahingly shuffled. In front of me clumsily gamboled the huge imitation of myself. It descended the terribly worn stairs. It turned to the right and disappeared.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>We were standing in a chapel.</p>
			<p>The shrinking light which my guide held had become suddenly minute; it was beating, senseless and futile, with shrill fists upon a thick enormous moisture of gloom. To the left and right through lean oblongs of stained glass burst dirty burglars of moonlight. The clammy stupid distance uttered dimly an uncanny conflict⁠—the mutterless tumbling of brutish shadows. A crowding ooze battled with my lungs. My nostrils fought against the monstrous atmospheric slime which hugged a sweet unpleasant odour. Staring ahead, I gradually disinterred the pale carrion of the darkness⁠—an altar, guarded with the ugliness of unlit candles, on which stood inexorably the efficient implements for eating God.</p>
			<p>I was to be confessed, then, of my guilty conscience, before retiring? It boded well for the morrow.</p>
			<p>… the measured accents of the fencer: “<i xml:lang="fr">Prenez votre paillasse.</i>” I turned. He was bending over a formless mass in one corner of the room. The mass stretched halfway to the ceiling. It was made of mattress-shapes. I pulled at one⁠—burlap, stuffed with prickly straw. I got it on my shoulder. “<i xml:lang="fr">Alors.</i>” He lighted me to the doorway by which we had entered. (I was somewhat pleased to leave the place.)</p>
			<p>Back, down a corridor, up more stairs; and we were confronted by a small scarred pair of doors from which hung two of the largest padlocks I had ever seen. Being unable to go further, I stopped: he produced a huge ring of keys. Fumbled with the locks. No sound of life: the keys rattled in the locks with surprising loudness; the latter, with an evil grace, yielded⁠—the two little miserable doors swung open.</p>
			<p>Into the square blackness I staggered with my paillasse. There was no way of judging the size of the dark room which uttered no sound. In front of me was a pillar. “Put it down by that post, and sleep there for tonight, in the morning <i xml:lang="fr">nous allons voir</i>,” directed the fencer. “You won’t need a blanket,” he added; and the doors clanged, the light and fencer disappeared.</p>
			<p>I needed no second invitation to sleep. Fully dressed, I fell on my paillasse with a weariness which I have never felt before or since. But I did not close my eyes: for all about me there rose a sea of most extraordinary sound⁠ ⁠… the hitherto empty and minute room became suddenly enormous: weird cries, oaths, laughter, pulling it sideways and backward, extending it to inconceivable depth and width, telescoping it to frightful nearness. From all directions, by at least thirty voices in eleven languages (I counted as I lay Dutch, Belgian, Spanish, Turkish, Arabian, Polish, Russian, Swedish, German, French⁠—and English) at distances varying from seventy feet to a few inches, for twenty minutes I was ferociously bombarded. Nor was my perplexity purely aural. About five minutes after lying down, I saw (by a hitherto unnoticed speck of light which burned near the doors which I had entered) two extraordinary looking figures⁠—one a well-set man with a big, black beard, the other a consumptive with a bald head and sickly moustache, both clad only in their knee-length chemises, hairy legs naked, feet bare⁠—wander down the room and urinate profusely in the corner nearest me. This act accomplished, the figures wandered back, greeted with a volley of ejaculatory abuse from the invisible co-occupants of my new sleeping-apartment; and disappeared in darkness.</p>
			<p>I remarked to myself that the gendarmes of this gendarmerie were peculiarly up in languages, and fell asleep.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
