<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX: Zoo-Loo</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Zoo-Loo</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>This is the name of the second Delectable Mountain.</p>
			<p>Zulu is he called, partly because he looks like what I have never seen, partly because the sounds somehow relate to his personality and partly because they seemed to please him.</p>
			<p>He is, of all the indescribables I have known, definitely the most completely or entirely indescribable. Then (quoth my reader) you will not attempt to describe him, I trust.⁠—Alas, in the medium which I am now using a certain amount or at least quality of description is disgustingly necessary. Were I free with a canvas and some colours⁠ ⁠… but I am not free. And so I will buck the impossible to the best of my ability. Which, after all, is one way of wasting your time.</p>
			<p>He did not come and he did not go. He drifted.</p>
			<p>His angular anatomy expended and collected itself with an effortless spontaneity which is the prerogative of fairies perhaps, or at any rate of those things in which we no longer believe. But he was more. There are certain things in which one is unable to believe for the simple reason that he never ceases to feel them. Things of this sort⁠—things which are always inside of us and, in fact, are us and which consequently will not be pushed off or away where we can begin thinking about them⁠—are no longer things; they, and the us which they are, equals A Verb; an <strong>is</strong>. The Zulu, then, I must perforce call an <strong>is</strong>.</p>
			<p>In this chapter I shall pretend briefly to describe certain aspects and attributes of an <strong>is</strong>. Which <strong>is</strong> we have called The Zulu, who Himself intrinsically and indubitably escapes analysis. <i xml:lang="fr">Allons!</i></p>
			<p>Let me first describe a Sunday morning when we lifted our heads to the fight of the stovepipes.</p>
			<p>I was awakened by a roar, a human roar, a roar such as only a Hollander can make when a Hollander is honestly angry. As I rose from the domain of the subconscious, the idea that the roar belonged to Bill The Hollander became conviction. Bill The Hollander, alias America Lakes, slept next to The Young Pole (by whom I refer to that young stupid-looking farmer with that peaches-and-cream complexion and those black puttees who had formed the rear rank, with the aid of The Zulu Himself, upon the arrival of Babysnatcher, Bill, Box, Zulu, and Young Pole aforesaid). Now this same Young Pole was a case. Insufferably vain and self-confident was he. Monsieur Auguste palliated most of his conceited offensiveness on the ground that he was <i xml:lang="fr">un garçon</i>; we on the ground that he was obviously and unmistakably The Zulu’s friend. This Young Pole, I remember, had me design upon the wall over his paillasse (shortly after his arrival) a virile <i xml:lang="fr">soldat</i> clutching a somewhat dubious flag⁠—I made the latter from descriptions furnished by Monsieur Auguste and The Young Pole himself⁠—intended, I may add, to be the flag of Poland. Underneath which beautiful picture I was instructed to perpetrate the flourishing inscription</p>
			<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
				<p>“Vive la Pologne”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">which I did to the best of my limited ability and for Monsieur Auguste’s sake. No sooner was the <i xml:lang="fr">photographie</i> complete than The Young Pole, patriotically elated, set out to demonstrate the superiority of his race and nation by making himself obnoxious. I will give him this credit: he was <i xml:lang="fr">pas méchant</i>, he was, in fact, a stupid boy. The Fighting Sheeney temporarily took him down a peg by flooring him in the nightly “<i xml:lang="fr">Boxe</i>” which The Fighting Sheeney instituted immediately upon the arrival of The Trick Raincoat⁠—a previous acquaintance of The Sheeney’s at La Santé; the similarity of occupations (or non-occupation; I refer to the profession of pimp) having cemented a friendship between these two. But, for all that The Young Pole’s Sunday-best clothes were covered with filth, and for all that his polished puttees were soiled and scratched by the splintery floor of The Enormous Room (he having rolled well off the blanket upon which the wrestling was supposed to occur), his spirit was dashed but for the moment. He set about cleaning and polishing himself, combing his hair, smoothing his cap⁠—and was as cocky as ever next morning. In fact I think he was cockier; for he took to guying Bill The Hollander in French, with which tongue Bill was only faintly familiar and of which, consequently, he was doubly suspicious. As The Young Pole lay in bed of an evening after <i xml:lang="fr">lumières éteintes</i>, he would guy his somewhat massive neighbour in a childish almost girlish voice, shouting with laughter when The Triangle rose on one arm and volleyed Dutch at him, pausing whenever The Triangle’s good-nature threatened to approach the breaking point, resuming after a minute or two when The Triangle appeared to be on the point of falling into the arms of Morpheus. This sort of <i xml:lang="fr">blague</i> had gone on for several nights without dangerous results. It was, however, inevitable that sooner or later something would happen⁠—and as we lifted our heads on this particular Sunday morn we were not surprised to see The Hollander himself standing over The Young Pole, with clenched paws, wringing shoulders, and an apocalyptic face whiter than Death’s horse.</p>
			<p>The Young Pole seemed incapable of realising that the climax had come. He lay on his back, cringing a little and laughing foolishly. The Zulu (who slept next to him on our side) had, apparently, just lighted a cigarette which projected upward from a slender holder. The Zulu’s face was as always absolutely expressionless. His chin, with a goodly growth of beard, protruded tranquilly from the blanket which concealed the rest of him with the exception of his feet⁠—feet which were ensconced in large, somewhat clumsy, leather boots. As The Zulu wore no socks, the Xs of the rawhide lacings on his bare flesh (blue, of course, with cold) presented a rather fascinating design. The Zulu was, to all intents and purposes, gazing at the ceiling.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Bill The Hollander, clad only in his shirt, his long lean muscled legs planted far apart, shook one fist after another at the recumbent Young Pole, thundering (curiously enough in English):</p>
			<p>“Come on you <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i> son-of-a-bitch of a Polak bastard and fight! Get up out o’ there you Polak hoor and I’ll kill you, you <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i> bastard you! I stood enough o’ your <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i> nonsense you <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i>” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>As Bill The Hollander’s thunder crescendoed steadily, cramming the utmost corners of The Enormous Room with <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummers</i> which echoingly telescoped one another, producing a dim huge shaggy mass of vocal anger, The Young Pole began to laugh less and less; began to plead and excuse and palliate and demonstrate⁠—and all the while the triangular tower in its naked legs and its palpitating chemise brandished its vast fists nearer and nearer, its ghastly yellow lips hurling cumulative volumes of rhythmic profanity, its blue eyes snapping like firecrackers, its enormous hairy chest heaving and tumbling like a monstrous hunk of seaweed, its flat soiled feet curling and uncurling their ten sour mutilated toes.</p>
			<p>The Zulu puffed gently as he lay.</p>
			<p>Bill The Hollander’s jaw, sticking into the direction of The Young Pole’s helpless gestures, looked (with the pitiless scorching face behind it) like some square house carried in the fore of a white cyclone. The Zulu depressed his chin; his eyes (poking slowly from beneath the visor of the cap which he always wore, in bed or out of it) regarded the vomiting tower with an abstracted interest. He allowed one hand delicately to escape from the blanket and quietly to remove from his lips the gently burning cigarette.</p>
			<p>“You won’t eh? You bloody Polak coward!”</p>
			<p class="continued">and with a speed in comparison to which lightning is snail-like the tower reached twice for the peaches-and-cream cheeks of the prone victim; who set up a tragic bellowing of his own, writhed upon his somewhat dislocated paillasse, raised his elbows shieldingly, and started to get to his feet by way of his trembling knees⁠—to be promptly knocked flat. Such a howling as The Young Pole set up I have rarely heard: he crawled sideways; he got on one knee; he made a dart forward⁠—and was caught cleanly by an uppercut, lifted through the air a yard, and spreadeagled against the stove which collapsed with an unearthly crash yielding an inky shower of soot upon the combatants and almost crowning The Hollander simultaneously with three four-feet sections of pipe. The Young Pole hit the floor, shouting, on his head, at the apogee of a neatly executed back-somersault, collapsed; rose yelling, and with flashing eyes picked up a length of the ruined <i xml:lang="fr">tuyau</i> which he lifted high in the air⁠—at which The Hollander seized in both fists a similar piece, brought it instantly forward and sideways with incognisable velocity and delivered such an immense wallop as smoothed The Young Pole horizontally to a distance of six feet; where he suddenly landed, stovepipe and all in a crash of entire collapse, having passed clear over The Zulu’s head. The Zulu, remarking</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="und">Muh</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">floated hingingly to a sitting position and was saluted by</p>
			<p>“Lie down you <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i> Polaker, I’ll get you next.”</p>
			<p>In spite of which he gathered himself to rise upward, catching as he did so a swish of The Hollander’s pipe-length which made his cigarette leap neatly, holder and all, upward and outward. The Young Pole had by this time recovered sufficiently to get upon his hands and knees behind the Zulu; who was hurriedly but calmly propelling himself in the direction of the cherished cigarette-holder, which had rolled under the remains of the stove. Bill The Hollander made for his enemy, raising perpendicularly ten feet in air the unrecognisably dented summit of the pipe which his colossal fists easily encompassed, the muscles in his treelike arms rolling beneath the chemise like balloons. The Young Pole with a shriek of fear climbed the Zulu⁠—receiving just as he had compassed this human hurdle a crack on the seat of his black pants that stood him directly upon his head. Pivoting slightly for an instant he fell loosely at full length on his own paillasse, and lay sobbing and roaring, one elbow protectingly raised, interspersing the inarticulations of woe with a number of sincerely uttered “<i xml:lang="fr">Assez!</i>”s. Meanwhile The Zulu had discovered the whereabouts of his treasure, had driftingly resumed his original position; and was quietly inserting the also-captured cigarette which appeared somewhat confused by its violent aerial journey. Over The Young Pole stood toweringly Bill The Hollander, his shirt almost in ribbons about his thick bulging neck, thundering as only Hollanders thunder</p>
			<p>“Have you got enough you <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i> Polak?”</p>
			<p class="continued">and The Young Pole, alternating nursing the mutilated pulp where his face had been and guarding it with futile and helpless and almost infantile gestures of his quivering hands, was sobbing</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Oui, Oui, Oui, Assez!</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">And Bill The Hollander hugely turned to The Zulu, stepping accurately to the paillasse of that individual, and demanded</p>
			<p>“And you, you <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i> Polaker, do you want t’ fight?”</p>
			<p class="continued">at which The Zulu gently waved in recognition of the compliment and delicately and hastily replied, between slow puffs,</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="und">Mog.</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">Whereat Bill The Hollander registered a disgusted kick in The Young Pole’s direction and swearingly resumed his paillasse.</p>
			<p>All this, the reader understands, having taken place in the terribly cold darkness of the half-dawn.</p>
			<p>That very day, after a great deal of examination (on the part of the Surveillant) of the participants in this Homeric struggle⁠—said examination failing to reveal the particular guilt or the particular innocence of either⁠—Judas, immaculately attired in a white coat, arrived from downstairs with a step ladder and proceeded with everyone’s assistance to reconstruct the original pipe. And a pretty picture Judas made. And a pretty bum job he made. But anyway the stovepipe drew; and everyone thanked God and fought for places about <i xml:lang="fr">le poêle</i>. And Monsieur Pet-airs hoped there would be no more fights for a while.</p>
			<p>One might think that The Young Pole had learned a lesson. But no. He had learned (it is true) to leave his immediate neighbour, America Lakes, to himself; but that is all he had learned. In a few days he was up and about, as full of <i xml:lang="fr">la blague</i> as ever. The Zulu seemed at times almost worried about him. They spoke together in Polish frequently and⁠—on The Zulu’s part⁠—earnestly. As subsequent events proved, whatever counsel The Zulu imparted was wasted upon his youthful friend. But let us turn for a moment to The Zulu himself.</p>
			<p>He could not, of course, write any language whatever. Two words of French he knew: they were <i xml:lang="fr">fromage</i> and <i xml:lang="fr">chapeau</i>. The former he pronounced “grumidge.” In English his vocabulary was even more simple, consisting of the single word “po-lees-man.” Neither <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> nor myself understood a syllable of Polish (tho’ we subsequently learned <i xml:lang="pl">Jin-dobri</i>, <i xml:lang="pl">nima-Zatz</i>, <i xml:lang="pl">zampni-pisk</i> and <i xml:lang="pl">shimay pisk</i>, and used to delight The Zulu hugely by giving him</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="pl">Jin-dobri, pan</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">every morning, also by asking him if he had a “<i xml:lang="pl">papierosa</i>”); consequently in that direction the path of communication was to all intents shut. And withal⁠—I say this not to astonish my reader but merely in the interests of truth⁠—I have never in my life so perfectly understood (even to the most exquisite nuances) whatever idea another human being desired at any moment to communicate to me, as I have in the case of The Zulu. And if I had one-third the command over the written word that he had over the unwritten and the unspoken⁠—not merely that; over the unspeakable and the unwritable⁠—God knows this history would rank with the deepest art of all time.</p>
			<p>It may be supposed that he was master of an intricate and delicate system whereby ideas were conveyed through signs of various sorts. On the contrary. He employed signs more or less, but they were in every case extraordinarily simple. The secret of his means of complete and unutterable communication lay in that very essence which I have only defined as an <strong>is</strong>; ended and began with an innate and unlearnable control over all which one can only describe as the homogeneously tactile. The Zulu, for example communicated the following facts in a very few minutes, with unspeakable ease, one day shortly after his arrival:</p>
			<p>He had been formerly a Polish farmer, with a wife and four children. He had left Poland to come to France, where one earned more money. His friend (The Young Pole) accompanied him. They were enjoying life placidly in, it may have been, Brest⁠—I forget⁠—when one night the gendarmes suddenly broke into their room, raided it, turned it bottomside up, handcuffed the two arch-criminals wrist to wrist, and said “Come with us.” Neither The Zulu nor The Young Pole had the ghost of an idea what all this meant or where they were going. They had no choice but to obey, and obey they did. Everyone boarded a train. Everyone got out. Bill The Hollander and The Babysnatcher appeared under escort, handcuffed to each other. They were immediately re-handcuffed to the Polish delegation. The four culprits were hustled, by rapid stages, through several small prisons to La Ferté Macé. During this journey (which consumed several nights and days) the handcuffs were not once removed. The prisoners slept sitting up or falling over one another. They urinated and defecated with the handcuffs on, all of them hitched together. At various times they complained to their captors that the agony caused by the swelling of their wrists was unbearable⁠—this agony, being the result of over-tightness of the handcuffs, might easily have been relieved by one of the <i xml:lang="fr">plantons</i> without loss of time or prestige. Their complaints were greeted by commands to keep their mouths shut or they’d get it worse than they had it. Finally they hove in sight of La Ferté and the handcuffs were removed in order to enable two of the prisoners to escort The Zulu’s box upon their shoulders, which they were only too happy to do under the circumstances. This box, containing not only The Zulu’s personal effects but also a great array of cartridges, knives and heaven knows what extraordinary souvenirs which he had gathered from God knows where, was a strong point in the disfavour of The Zulu from the beginning; and was consequently brought along as evidence. Upon arriving, all had been searched, the box included, and sent to The Enormous Room. The Zulu (at the conclusion of this dumb and eloquent recital) slipped his sleeve gently above his wrist and exhibited a bluish ring, at whose persistence upon the flesh he evinced great surprise and pleasure, winking happily to us. Several days later I got the same story from The Young Pole in French; but after some little difficulty due to linguistic misunderstandings, and only after a half-hour’s intensive conversation. So far as directness, accuracy and speed are concerned, between the method of language and the method of The Zulu, there was not the slightest comparison.</p>
			<p>Not long after The Zulu arrived I witnessed a mystery: it was toward the second <i xml:lang="fr">soupe</i>, and <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I were proceeding (our spoons in our hands) in the direction of the door, when beside us suddenly appeared The Zulu⁠—who took us by the shoulders gently and (after carefully looking about him) produced from, as nearly as one could see, his right ear a twenty franc note; asking us in a few well-chosen silences to purchase with it confiture, <i xml:lang="fr">fromage</i>, and <i xml:lang="fr">chocolat</i> at the canteen. He silently apologized for encumbering us with these errands, averring that he had been found when he arrived to have no money upon him and consequently wished to keep intact this little tradition. We were only too delighted to assist so remarkable a prestidigitator⁠—we scarcely knew him at that time⁠—and <i xml:lang="fr">après la soupe</i> we bought as requested, conveying the treasures to our bunks and keeping guard over them. About fifteen minutes after the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> had locked everyone in, The Zulu driftingly arrived before us; whereupon we attempted to give him his purchases⁠—but he winked and told us wordlessly that we should (if we would be so kind) keep them for him, immediately following this suggestion by a request that we open the marmalade or jam or whatever it might be called⁠—preserve is perhaps the best word. We complied with alacrity. Now (he said soundlessly), you may if you like offer me a little. We did. Now have some yourselves, The Zulu commanded. So we attacked the confiture with a will, spreading it on pieces or, rather, chunks of the brownish bread whose faintly rotten odour is one element of the life at La Ferté which I, for one, find it easier to remember than to forget. And next, in similar fashion, we opened the cheese and offered some to our visitor; and finally the chocolate. Whereupon The Zulu rose up, thanked us tremendously for our gifts, and⁠—winking solemnly⁠—floated off.</p>
			<p>Next day he told us that he wanted us to eat all of the delicacies we had purchased, whether or not he happened to be in the vicinity. He also informed us that when they were gone we should buy more until the twenty francs gave out. And, so generous were our appetites, it was not more than two or three weeks later that The Zulu having discovered that our supplies were exhausted produced from his back hair a neatly folded twenty franc note; wherewith we invaded the canteen with renewed violence. About this time The Spy got busy and The Zulu, with The Young Pole for interpreter, was summoned to Monsieur le Directeur, who stripped The Zulu and searched every wrinkle and crevice of his tranquil anatomy for money (so The Zulu vividly informed us)⁠—finding not a sou. The Zulu, who vastly enjoyed the discomfiture of Monsieur, cautiously extracted (shortly after this) a twenty franc note from the back of his neck, and presented it to us with extreme care. I may say that most of his money went for cheese, of which The Zulu was almost abnormally fond. Nothing more suddenly delightful has happened to me than happened, one day, when I was leaning from the next to the last window⁠—the last being the property of users of the cabinet⁠—of The Enormous Room, contemplating the muddy expanse below, and wondering how the Hollanders had ever allowed the last two windows to be opened. Margherite passed from the door of the building proper to the little washing shed. As the sentinel’s back was turned I saluted her, and she looked up and smiled pleasantly. And then⁠—a hand leapt quietly forward from the wall, just to my right; the fingers clenched gently upon one-half a newly broken cheese; the hand moved silently in my direction, cheese and all, pausing when perhaps six inches from my nose. I took the cheese from the hand, which departed as if by magic; and a little later had the pleasure of being joined at my window by The Zulu, who was brushing cheese crumbs from his long slender Mandarin mustaches, and who expressed profound astonishment and equally profound satisfaction upon noting that I too had been enjoying the pleasures of cheese. Not once, but several times, this Excalibur appearance startled <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and me: in fact the extreme modesty and incomparable shyness of The Zulu found only in this procedure a satisfactory method of bestowing presents upon his two friends⁠ ⁠… I would I could see that long hand once more, the sensitive fingers poised upon a half-camembert; the bodiless arm swinging gently and surely with a derrick-like grace and certainty in my direction.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Not very long after The Zulu’s arrival occurred an incident which I give with pleasure because it shows the dauntless and indomitable, not to say intrepid, stuff of which <i xml:lang="fr">plantons</i> are made. The single <i xml:lang="fr">seau</i> which supplied the (at this time) sixty-odd inhabitants of The Enormous Room with drinking water had done its duty, shortly after our arrival from the first <i xml:lang="fr">soupe</i> with such thoroughness as to leave a number of unfortunate (among whom I was one) waterless. The interval between <i xml:lang="fr">soupe</i> and promenade loomed darkly and thirstily before us unfortunates. As the minutes passed, it loomed with greater and greater distinctness. At the end of twenty minutes our thirst⁠—stimulated by an especially salty dose of lukewarm water for lunch⁠—attained truly desperate proportions. Several of the bolder thirsters leaned from the various windows of the room and cried</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">De l’eau, planton; de l’eau, s’il vous plaît</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">upon which the guardian of the law looked up suspiciously; pausing a moment as if to identify the scoundrels whose temerity had so far got the better of their understanding as to lead them to address him, a <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i>, in familiar terms⁠—and then grimly resumed his walk, gun on shoulder, revolver on hip, the picture of simple and unaffected majesty. Whereat, seeing that entreaties were of no avail, we put our seditious and dangerous heads together and formulated a very great scheme; to wit, the lowering of an empty tin-pail about eight inches high, which tin-pail had formerly contained confiture, which confiture had long since passed into the guts of Monsieur Auguste, The Zulu, <abbr class="name">B.</abbr>, myself, and⁠—as The Zulu’s friend⁠—The Young Pole. Now this fiendish imitation of The Old Oaken Bucket That Hung In The Well was to be lowered to the good-natured Marguerite (who went to and fro from the door of the building to the washing shed); who was to fill it for us at the pump situated directly under us in a cavernous chilly cave on the ground-floor, then rehitch it to the rope, and guide its upward beginning. The rest was in the hands of Fate.</p>
			<p>Bold might the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> be; we were no <i xml:lang="fr">fainéants</i>. We made a little speech to everyone in general desiring them to lend us their belts. The Zulu, the immensity of whose pleasure in this venture cannot be even indicated, stripped off his belt with unearthly agility⁠—Monsieur Auguste gave his, which we tongue-holed to The Zulu’s⁠—somebody else contributed a necktie⁠—another a shoestring⁠—The Young Pole his scarf, of which he was impossibly proud⁠—<abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> The extraordinary rope so constructed was now tried out in The Enormous Room, and found to be about thirty-eight feet long; or in other words of ample length, considering that the window itself was only three stories above terra firma. Margherite was put on her guard by signs, executed when the <i xml:lang="fr">planton’s</i> back was turned (which it was exactly half the time, as his patrol stretched at right angles to the wing of the building whose third story we occupied). Having attached the minute bucket to one end (the stronger looking end, the end which had more belts and less neckties and handkerchiefs) of our improvised rope, <abbr class="name">B.</abbr>, Harree, myself and The Zulu bided our time at the window⁠—then seizing a favourable opportunity, in enormous haste began paying out the infernal contrivance. Down went the sinful tin-pail, safely past the window-ledge just below us, straight and true to the waiting hands of the faithful Margherite⁠—who had just received it and was on the point of undoing the bucket from the first belt when, lo! who should come in sight around the corner but the pimply-faced brilliantly-uniformed glitteringly-putteed <i xml:lang="fr">sergeant de plantons lui-même</i>. Such amazement as dominated his puny features I have rarely seen equalled. He stopped dead in his tracks; for one second stupidly contemplated the window, ourselves, the wall, seven neckties, five belts, three handkerchiefs, a scarf, two shoestrings, the jam pail, and Margherite⁠—then, wheeling, noticed the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> (who peacefully and with dignity was pursuing a course which carried him further and further from the zone of operations) and finally, spinning around again, cried shrilly</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Qu’est-ce que vous avez foutu avec cette machine-là?</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">At which cry the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> staggered, rotated, brought his gun clumsily off his shoulder, and stared, trembling all over with emotion, at his superior.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Là-bas!</i>” screamed the pimply <i xml:lang="fr">sergeant de plantons</i>, pointing fiercely in our direction.</p>
			<p>Margherite, at his first command, had let go the jam-pail and sought shelter in the building. Simultaneously with her flight we all began pulling on the rope for dear life, making the bucket bound against the wall.</p>
			<p>Upon hearing the dreadful exclamation “<i xml:lang="fr">Là-bas!</i>” the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> almost fell down. The sight which greeted his eyes caused him to excrete a single mouthful of vivid profanity, made him grip his gun like a hero, set every nerve in his noble and faithful body tingling. Apparently however he had forgotten completely his gun, which lay faithfully and expectingly in his two noble hands.</p>
			<p>“Attention!” screamed the sergeant.</p>
			<p>The <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> did something to his gun very aimlessly and rapidly.</p>
			<p>“<strong>Fire!</strong>” shrieked the sergeant, scarlet with rage and mortification.</p>
			<p>The <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i>, cool as steel, raised his gun.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr"><strong>Nom de dieu tirez!</strong></i>”</p>
			<p>The bucket, in big merry sounding jumps, was approaching the window below us.</p>
			<p>The <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> took aim, falling fearlessly on one knee, and closing both eyes. I confess that my blood stood on tiptoe; but what was death to the loss of that jam-bucket, let alone everyone’s apparel which everyone had so generously loaned? We kept on hauling silently. Out of the corner of my eye I beheld the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i>⁠—now on both knees, musket held to his shoulder by his left arm and pointing unflinchingly at us one and all⁠—hunting with his right arm and hand in his belt for cartridges! A few seconds after this fleeting glimpse of heroic devotion had penetrated my considerably heightened sensitivity⁠—<strong>up</strong> suddenly came the bucket and over backwards we all went together on the floor of The Enormous Room. And as we fell I heard a cry like the cry of a boiler announcing noon⁠—</p>
			<p>“Too late!”</p>
			<p>I recollect that I lay on the floor for some minutes, half on top of The Zulu and three-quarters smothered by Monsieur Auguste, shaking with laughter.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Then we all took to our hands and knees, and made for our bunks.</p>
			<p>I believe no one (curiously enough) got punished for this atrocious misdemeanour⁠—except the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i>; who was punished for not shooting us, although God knows he had done his very best.</p>
			<p>And now I must chronicle the famous duel which took place between The Zulu’s compatriot, The Young Pole, and that herebefore introduced pimp, The Fighting Sheeney; a duel which came as a climax to a vast deal of teasing on the part of The Young Pole⁠—who, as previously remarked, had not learned his lesson from Bill The Hollander with the thoroughness which one might have expected of him.</p>
			<p>In addition to a bit of French and considerable Spanish, Rockyfeller’s valet spoke Russian very (I did not have to be told) badly. The Young Pole, perhaps sore at being rolled on the floor of The Enormous Room by the worthy Sheeney, set about nagging him just as he had done in the case of neighbour Bill. His favourite epithet for the conqueror was “<i xml:lang="pl">moshki</i>” or “<i xml:lang="pl">moski</i>” I never was sure which. Whatever it meant (The Young Pole and Monsieur Auguste informed me that it meant “Jew” in a highly derogatory sense) its effect upon the noble Sheeney was definitely unpleasant. But when coupled with the word “<i xml:lang="pl">moskosi</i>,” accent on the second syllable or long <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">o</i>, its effect was more than unpleasant⁠—it was really disagreeable. At intervals throughout the day, on promenade, of an evening, the ugly phrase</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="pl"><strong>Mos</strong>-ki mos<strong>ko</strong>si</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">resounded through The Enormous Room. The Fighting Sheeney, then rapidly convalescing from syphilis, bided his time. The Young Pole moreover had a way of jesting upon the subject of The Sheeney’s infirmity. He would, particularly during the afternoon promenade, shout various none too subtle allusions to Moshki’s physical condition for the benefit of <i xml:lang="fr">les femmes</i>. And in response would come peals of laughter from the girls’ windows, shrill peals and deep guttural peals intersecting and breaking joints like overlapping shingles on the roof of Craziness. So hearty did these responses become one afternoon that, in answer to loud pleas from the injured Moshki, the pimply <i xml:lang="fr">sergeant de plantons</i> himself came to the gate in the barbed wire fence and delivered a lecture upon the seriousness of venereal ailments (heartfelt, I should judge by the looks of him), as follows:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Il ne faut pas rigoler de ça. Savez-vous? C’est une maladie, ça</i>,”</p>
			<p class="continued">which little sermon contrasted agreeably with his usual remarks concerning, and in the presence of, <i xml:lang="fr">les femmes</i>, whereof the essence lay in a single phrase of prepositional significance⁠—</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">bon pour coucher avec</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">he would say shrilly, his puny eyes assuming an expression of amorous wisdom which was most becoming.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>One day we were all upon afternoon promenade, (it being <i xml:lang="fr">beau temps</i> for that part of the world), under the auspices of by all odds one of the littlest and mildest and most delicate specimens of mankind that ever donned the high and dangerous duties of a <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i>. As <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> says: “He always looked like a June bride.” This mannikin could not have been five feet high, was perfectly proportioned (unless we except the musket upon his shoulder and the bayonet at his belt), and minced to and fro with a feminine grace which suggested⁠—at least to <i xml:lang="fr">les deux citoyens</i> of These United States⁠—the extremely authentic epithet “fairy.” He had such a pretty face! and so cute a moustache! and such darling legs! and such a wonderful smile! For plantonic purposes the smile⁠—which brought two little dimples into his pink cheeks⁠—was for the most part suppressed. However it was impossible for this little thing to look stern: the best he could do was to look poignantly sad. Which he did with great success, standing like a tragic last piece of uneaten candy in his big box at the end of the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i>, and eyeing the sinful <i xml:lang="fr">hommes</i> with sad pretty eyes. Won’t anyone eat me?⁠—he seemed to ask.⁠—I’m really delicious, you know, perfectly delicious, really I am.</p>
			<p>To resume: everyone being in the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i>, it was well filled, not only from the point of view of space but of sound. A barnyard crammed with pigs, cows, horses, ducks, geese, hens, cats and dogs could not possibly have produced one-fifth of the racket that emanated, spontaneously and inevitably, from the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i>. Above which racket I heard <i xml:lang="fr">tout à coup</i> a roar of pain and surprise; and looking up with some interest and also in some alarm, beheld The Young Pole backing and filling and slipping in the deep ooze under the strenuous jolts, jabs and even haymakers of The Fighting Sheeney, who, with his coat off and his cap off and his shirt open at the neck, was swatting luxuriously and for all he was worth that round helpless face and that peaches-and-cream complexion. From where I stood, at a distance of six or eight yards, the impact of the Sheeney’s fist on The Young Pole’s jaw and cheeks was disconcertingly audible. The latter made not the slightest attempt to defend himself, let alone retaliate; he merely skidded about, roaring and clutching desperately out of harm’s way his long white scarf, of which (as I have mentioned) he was extremely proud. But for the sheer brutality of the scene it would have been highly ludicrous. The Sheeney was swinging like a windmill and hammering like a blacksmith. His ugly head lowered, the chin protruding, lips drawn back in a snarl, teeth sticking forth like a gorilla’s, he banged and smote that moon-shaped physiognomy as if his life depended upon utterly annihilating it. And annihilate it he doubtless would have, but for the prompt (not to say punctual) heroism of The June Bride⁠—who, lowering his huge gun, made a rush for the fight; stopped at a safe distance; and began squeaking at the very top and even summit of his faint girlish voice:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Aux armes! Aux armes!</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">which plaintive and intrepid utterance by virtue of its very fragility penetrated the building and released The Black Holster, who bounded through the gate, roaring a salutation as he bounded, and in a jiffy had cuffed the participants apart. “All right, whose fault is this?” he roared. And a number of highly reputable spectators, such as Judas and The Fighting Sheeney himself, said it was The Young Pole’s fault. “<i xml:lang="fr">Allez! Au cabinot! De suite!</i>” And off trickled the sobbing Young Pole, winding his great scarf comfortingly about him, to the dungeon.</p>
			<p>Some few minutes later we encountered The Zulu speaking with Monsieur Auguste. Monsieur Auguste was very sorry. He admitted that The Young Pole had brought his punishment upon himself. But he was only a boy. The Zulu’s reaction to the affair was absolutely profound: he indicated <i xml:lang="fr">les femmes</i> with one eye, his trousers with another, and converted his utterly plastic personality into an amorous machine for several seconds, thereby vividly indicating the root of the difficulty. That the stupidity of his friend, The Young Pole, hurt The Zulu deeply I discovered by looking at him as he lay in bed the next morning, limply and sorrowfully prone; beside him the empty paillasse, which meant <i xml:lang="fr">cabinot</i>⁠ ⁠… his perfectly extraordinary face (a face perfectly at once fluent and angular, expressionless and sensitive) told me many things whereof even The Zulu might not speak, things which in order entirely to suffer he kept carefully and thoroughly ensconced behind his rigid and mobile eyes.</p>
			<p>From the day that The Young Pole emerged from <i xml:lang="fr">cabinot</i> he was our friend. The <i xml:lang="fr">blague</i> had been at last knocked out of him, thanks to <i xml:lang="fr">Un Mangeur de Blanc</i>, as the little Machine-Fixer expressively called The Fighting Sheeney. Which <i xml:lang="fr">mangeur</i>, by the way (having been exonerated from all blame by the more enlightened spectators of the unequal battle) strode immediately and ferociously over to <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and me, a hideous grin crackling upon the coarse surface of his mug, and demanded⁠—hiking at the front of his trousers⁠—</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Bon, eh? Bien fait, eh?</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">and a few days later asked us for money, even hinting that he would be pleased to become our special protector. I think, as a matter of fact, we “lent” him one-eighth of what he wanted (perhaps we lent him five cents) in order to avoid trouble and get rid of him. At any rate, he didn’t bother us particularly afterwards; and if a nickel could accomplish that a nickel should be proud of itself.</p>
			<p>And always, through the falling greyness of the desolate Autumn, The Zulu was beside us, or wrapped around a tree in the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i>, or melting in a post after tapping Mexique in a game of hide-and-seek, or suffering from toothache⁠—God, I wish I could see him expressing for us the wickedness of toothache⁠—or losing his shoes and finding them under Garibaldi’s bed (with a huge perpendicular wink which told tomes about Garibaldi’s fatal propensities for ownership), or marvelling silently at the power of <i xml:lang="fr">les femmes apropos</i> his young friend⁠—who, occasionally resuming his former bravado, would stand in the black evil rain with his white farm scarf twined about him, singing as of old:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song" xml:lang="fr">
				<p>
					<span>“Je suis content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>pour mettre dedans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>suis pas pressé</span>
					<br/>
					<span>pour tirer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ah-la-la-la⁠ ⁠…”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">… And the Zulu came out of <i xml:lang="fr">la commission</i> with identically the expressionless expression which he had carried into it; and God knows what The Three Wise Men found out about him, but (whatever it was) they never found and never will find that Something whose discovery was worth to me more than all the round and powerless money of the world⁠—limbs’ tin grace, wooden wink, shoulderless, unhurried body, velocity of a grasshopper, soul up under his armpits, mysteriously falling over the ownness of two feet, floating fish of his slimness half a bird.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Gentlemen, I am inexorably grateful for the gift of these ignorant and indivisible things.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
