<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII: An Approach to the Delectable Mountains</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">An Approach to the Delectable Mountains</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Sunday (says <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pound with infinite penetration) is a dreadful day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Monday is much pleasanter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then let us muse a little space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon fond Nature’s morbid grace.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>It is a great and distinct pleasure to have penetrated and arrived upon the outside of <i xml:lang="fr">La Dimanche</i>. We may now⁠—Nature’s morbid grace being a topic whereof the reader has already heard much and will necessarily hear more⁠—turn to the “much pleasanter,” the in fact “Monday,” aspect of La Ferté; by which I mean <i xml:lang="fr">les nouveaux</i> whose arrivals and reactions constituted the actual kinetic aspect of our otherwise merely real Nonexistence. So let us tighten our belts, (everyone used to tighten his belt at least twice a day at La Ferté, but for another reason⁠—to follow and keep track of his surely shrinking anatomy) seize our staffs into our hands, and continue the ascent begun with the first pages of the story.</p>
			<p>One day I found myself expecting <i xml:lang="fr">La Soupe</i> Number 1 with something like avidity. My appetite faded, however, upon perceiving a vision en route to the empty place at my left. It slightly resembled a tall youth not more than sixteen or seventeen years old, having flaxen hair, a face whose whiteness I have never seen equalled, and an expression of intense starvation which might have been well enough in a human being but was somewhat unnecessarily uncanny in a ghost. The ghost, floating and slenderly, made for the place beside me, seated himself suddenly and gently like a morsel of white wind, and regarded the wall before him. <i xml:lang="fr">La soupe</i> arrived. He obtained a plate (after some protest on the part of certain members of our table to whom the advent of a newcomer meant only that everyone would get less for lunch), and after gazing at his portion for a second in apparent wonderment at its size caused it gently and suddenly to disappear. I was no sluggard as a rule, but found myself outclassed by minutes⁠—which, said I to myself, is not to be worried over since ’tis sheer vanity to compete with the supernatural. But (even as I lugged the last spoonful of lukewarm greasy water to my lips) this ghost turned to me for all the world as if I too were a ghost, and remarked softly:</p>
			<p>“Will you lend me ten cents? I am going to buy tobacco at the canteen.”</p>
			<p>One has no business crossing a spirit, I thought; and produced the sum cheerfully⁠—which sum disappeared, the ghost arose slenderly and soundlessly, and I was left with emptiness beside me.</p>
			<p>Later I discovered that this ghost was called Pete.</p>
			<p>Pete was a Hollander, and therefore found firm and staunch friends in Harree, John o’ the Bathhouse and the other Hollanders. In three days Pete discarded the immateriality which had constituted the exquisite definiteness of his advent, and donned the garb of flesh-and-blood. This change was due equally to <i xml:lang="fr">La Soupe</i> and the canteen, and to the finding of friends. For Pete had been in solitary confinement for three months and had had nothing to eat but bread and water during that time, having been told by the jailors (as he informed us, without a trace of bitterness) that they would shorten his sentence provided he did not partake of <i xml:lang="fr">La Soupe</i> during his incarceration⁠—that is to say, <i xml:lang="fr">le gouvernement français</i> had a little joke at Pete’s expense. Also he had known nobody during that time but the five fingers which deposited said bread and water with conscientious regularity on the ground beside him. Being a Hollander neither of these things killed him⁠—on the contrary, he merely turned into a ghost, thereby fooling the excellent French Government within an inch of its foolable life. He was a very excellent friend of ours⁠—I refer as usual to <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and myself⁠—and from the day of his arrival until the day of his departure to Précigne along with <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and three others I never ceased to like and to admire him. He was naturally sensitive, extremely the antithesis of coarse (which “refined” somehow does not imply) had not in the least suffered from a “good,” as we say, education, and possessed an at once frank and unobstreperous personality. Very little that had happened to Pete’s physique had escaped Pete’s mind. This mind of his quietly and firmly had expanded in proportion as its owner’s trousers had become too big around the waist⁠—altogether not so extraordinary as was the fact that, after being physically transformed as I have never seen a human being transformed by food and friends, Pete thought and acted with exactly the same quietness and firmness as before. He was a rare spirit, and I salute him wherever he is.</p>
			<p>Mexique was a good friend of Pete’s, as he was of ours. He had been introduced to us by a man we called One Eyed David, who was married and had a wife downstairs, with which wife he was allowed to live all day⁠—being conducted to and from her society by a <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i>. He spoke Spanish well and French passably; had black hair, bright Jewish eyes, a dead-fish expression, and a both amiable and courteous disposition. One Eyed Dah-veed (as it was pronounced of course) had been in prison at Noyon during the German occupation, which he described fully and without hyperbole⁠—stating that no one could have been more considerate or just than the commander of the invading troops. Dah-veed had seen with his own eyes a French girl extend an apple to one of the common soldiers as the German army entered the outskirts of the city: “ ‘Take it,’ she said, ‘you are tired.’⁠—‘Madame,’ answered the German soldier in French, ‘thank you’⁠—and he looked in his pocket and found ten cents. ‘No, no,’ the young girl said. ‘I don’t want any money. I give it to you with good will.’⁠—‘Pardon, madame,’ said the soldier, ‘you must know that a German soldier is forbidden to take anything without paying for it.’ ”⁠—And before that, One Eyed Dah-veed had talked at Noyon with a barber whose brother was an aviator with the French Army: “ ‘My brother,’ the barber said to me, ‘told me a beautiful story the other day. He was flying over the lines, and he was amazed, one day, to see that the French guns were not firing on the boches but on the French themselves. He landed precipitously, sprang from his machine and ran to the office of the general. He saluted, and cried in great excitement: “General, you are firing on the French!” The general regarded him without interest, without budging; then, he said, very simply: “They have begun, they must finish.” “Which is why perhaps,” said One Eyed Dah-veed, looking two ways at once with his uncorrelated eyes, “the Germans entered Noyon.⁠ ⁠…” But to return to Mexique.</p>
			<p>One night we had a <i xml:lang="fr">soirée</i>, as Dah-veed called it, apropos a pot of hot tea which Dah-veed’s wife had given him to take upstairs, it being damnably damp and cold (as usual) in The Enormous Room. Dah-veed, cautiously and in a low voice, invited us to his mattress to enjoy this extraordinary pleasure; and we accepted, <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I, with huge joy; and sitting on Dah-veed’s paillasse we found somebody who turned out to be Mexique⁠—to whom, by his right name, our host introduced us with all the poise and courtesy vulgarly associated with a French salon.</p>
			<p>For Mexique I cherish and always will cherish unmitigated affection. He was perhaps nineteen years old, very chubby, extremely good-natured; and possessed of an unruffled disposition which extended to the most violent and obvious discomforts a subtle and placid illumination. He spoke beautiful Spanish, had been born in Mexico, and was really called Philippe Burgos. He had been in New York. He criticised someone for saying “Yes” to us, one day, stating that no American said “Yes” but “Yuh”; which⁠—whatever the reader may think⁠—is to my mind a very profound observation. In New York he had worked nights as a fireman in some big building or other and slept days, and this method of seeing America he had enjoyed extremely. Mexique had one day taken ship (being curious to see the world) and worked as chauffeur⁠—that is to say in the stokehole. He had landed in, I think, Havre; had missed his ship; had inquired something of a gendarme in French (which he spoke not at all, with the exception of a phrase or two like “<i xml:lang="fr">quelle heure qu’il est?</i>”); had been kindly treated and told that he would be taken to a ship <i xml:lang="fr">de suite</i>⁠—had boarded a train in the company of two or three kind gendarmes, ridden a prodigious distance, got off the train finally with high hopes, walked a little distance, come in sight of the grey perspiring wall of La Ferté, and⁠—“So, I ask one of them: ‘Where is the Ship?’ He point to here and tell me, ‘There is the ship.’ I say: ‘This is a God Dam Funny Ship’ ”⁠—quoth Mexique, laughing.</p>
			<p>Mexique played dominoes with us (<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> having devised a set from cardboard), strolled The Enormous Room with us, telling of his father and brother in Mexico, of the people, of the customs; and⁠—when we were in the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i>⁠—wrote the entire conjugation of <i xml:lang="es">tengo</i> in the deep mud with a little stick, squatting and chuckling and explaining. He and his brother had both participated in the revolution which made Carranza president. His description of which affair was utterly delightful.</p>
			<p>“Every-body run a-round with guns” Mexique said. “And bye-and-bye no see to shoot everybody, so everybody go home.” We asked if he had shot anybody himself. “Sure. I shoot everybody I do’no” Mexique answered laughing. “I t’ink every-body no hit me” he added, regarding his stocky person with great and quiet amusement. When we asked him once what he thought about the war, he replied, “I t’ink lotta bull⁠—,” which, upon copious reflection, I decided absolutely expressed my own point of view.</p>
			<p>Mexique was generous, incapable of either stupidity or despondency, and mannered as a gentleman is supposed to be. Upon his arrival he wrote almost immediately to the Mexican (or is it Spanish?) consul⁠—“He know my fader in Mexico”⁠—stating in perfect and unambiguous Spanish the facts leading to his arrest; and when I said goodbye to <i xml:lang="fr">La Misère</i> Mexique was expecting a favorable reply at any moment, as indeed he had been cheerfully expecting for some time. If he reads this history I hope he will not be too angry with me for whatever injustice it does to one of the altogether pleasantest companions I have ever had. My notebooks, one in particular, are covered with conjugations which bear witness to Mexique’s ineffable good-nature. I also have a somewhat superficial portrait of his back sitting on a bench by the stove. I wish I had another of Mexique out in <i xml:lang="fr">le jardin</i> with a man who worked there who was a Spaniard, and whom the Surveillant had considerately allowed Mexique to assist; with the perfectly correct idea that it would be pleasant for Mexique to talk to someone who could speak Spanish⁠—if not as well as he, Mexique, could, at least passably well. As it is, I must be content to see my very good friend sitting with his hands in his pockets by the stove with Bill the Hollander beside him. And I hope it was not many days after my departure that Mexique went free. Somehow I feel that he went free⁠ ⁠… and if I am right, I will only say about Mexique’s freedom what I have heard him slowly and placidly say many times concerning not only the troubles which were common property to us all but his own peculiar troubles as well.</p>
			<p>“That’s fine.”</p>
			<p>Here let me introduce the Guard Champêtre, whose name I have already taken more or less in vain. A little, sharp, hungry-looking person who, subsequent to being a member of a rural police force (of which membership he seemed rather proud), had served his <i xml:lang="fr">patrie</i>⁠—otherwise known as <i xml:lang="fr">La Belgique</i>⁠—in the capacity of motorcyclist. As he carried dispatches from one end of the line to the other his disagreeably big eyes had absorbed certain peculiarly inspiring details of civilised warfare. He had, at one time, seen a bridge hastily constructed by <i xml:lang="fr">les alliés</i> over the Yser River, the cadavers of the faithful and the enemy alike being thrown in helter-skelter to make a much needed foundation for the timbers. This little procedure had considerably outraged the Guard Champêtre’s sense of decency. The Yser, said he, flowed perfectly red for a long time. “We were all together: Belgians, French, English⁠ ⁠… we Belgians did not see any good reason for continuing the battle. But we continued. O indeed we continued. Do you know why?”</p>
			<p>I said that I was afraid I didn’t.</p>
			<p>“Because in front of us we had the German shells, behind, the French machine guns, always the French machine guns, <i xml:lang="fr">mon vieux</i>.”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Je ne comprends pas bien</i>” I said in confusion, recalling all the highfalutin rigmarole which Americans believed⁠—(little martyred Belgium protected by the allies from the inroads of the aggressor, <abbr>etc.</abbr>)⁠—“why should the French put machine guns behind you?”</p>
			<p>The Guard Champêtre lifted his big empty eyes nervously. The vast hollows in which they lived darkened. His little rather hard face trembled within itself. I thought for a second he was going to throw a fit at my feet⁠—instead of doing which he replied pettishly, in a sunken bright whisper:</p>
			<p>“To keep us going forward. At times a company would drop its guns and turn to run. <i>Pupupupupupupupup</i>⁠ ⁠…” his short unlovely arms described gently the swinging of a <i xml:lang="fr">mitrailleuse</i>⁠ ⁠… “finish. The Belgian soldiers to left and right of them took the hint. If they did not⁠—<i>pupupupupupup</i>.⁠ ⁠… O we went forward. Yes. <i xml:lang="fr">Vive le patriotisme.</i>”</p>
			<p>And he rose with a gesture which seemed to brush away these painful trifles from his memory, crossed the end of the room with short rapid steps, and began talking to his best friend Judas, who was at that moment engaged in training his wobbly mustachios.⁠ ⁠… Toward the close of my visit to La Ferté the Guard Champêtre was really happy for a period of two days⁠—during which time he moved in the society of a rich, intelligent, mistakenly arrested and completely disagreeable youth in bone spectacles, copious hair and spiral putees, whom <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I partially contented ourselves by naming Jo Jo The Lion Faced Boy. Had the charges against Jo Jo been stronger my tale would have been longer⁠—fortunately for tout le monde they had no basis; and back went Jo Jo to his native Paris, leaving the Guard Champêtre with Judas and attacks of only occasionally interesting despair.</p>
			<p>The reader may suppose that it is about time another Delectable Mountain appeared upon his horizon. Let him keep his eyes wide open, for here one comes.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Whenever our circle was about to be increased, a bell from somewhere afar (as a matter of fact the gate which had admitted my weary self to La Ferté upon a memorable night, as already has been faithfully recounted) tanged audibly⁠—whereat up jumped the more strenuous inhabitants of The Enormous Room and made pell-mell for the common peephole, situated at the door end or nearer end of our habitat and commanding a somewhat fragmentary view of the gate together with the arrivals, male and female, whom the bell announced. In one particular case the watchers appeared almost unduly excited, shouting “four!”⁠—“big box”⁠—“five gendarmes!” and other incoherences with a loudness which predicted great things. As nearly always, I had declined to participate in the melee; and was still lying comfortably horizontal on my bed (thanking God that it had been well and thoroughly mended by a fellow prisoner whom we called The Frog and Le Coiffeur⁠—a tremendously keen-eyed man with a large drooping moustache, whose boon companion, chiefly on account of his shape and gait, we knew as The Lobster) when the usual noises attendant upon the unlocking of the door began with exceptional violence. I sat up. The door shot open, there was a moment’s pause, a series of grunting remarks uttered by two rather terrible voices; then in came four nouveaux of a decidedly interesting appearance. They entered in two ranks of two each. The front rank was made up of an immensely broad shouldered hipless and consequently triangular man in blue trousers belted with a piece of ordinary rope, plus a thickset ruffianly personage the most prominent part of whose accoutrements were a pair of hideous whiskers. I leaped to my feet and made for the door, thrilled in spite of myself. By the, in this case, shifty blue eyes, the pallid hair, the well-knit form of the rope’s owner I knew instantly a Hollander. By the coarse brutal features half-hidden in the piratical whiskers, as well as by the heavy mean wandering eyes, I recognised with equal speed a Belgian. Upon his shoulders the front rank bore a large box, blackish, well-made, obviously very weighty, which box it set down with a grunt of relief hard by the cabinet. The rear rank marched behind in a somewhat asymmetrical manner: a young, stupid-looking, clear-complexioned fellow (obviously a farmer, and having expensive black puttees and a handsome cap with a shiny black leather visor) slightly preceded a tall, gliding, thinnish, unjudgeable personage who peeped at everyone quietly and solemnly from beneath the visor of a somewhat large slovenly cloth cap showing portions of a lean, long, incognisable face upon which sat, or rather drooped, a pair of mustachios identical in character with those which are sometimes pictorially attributed to a Chinese dignitary⁠—in other words, the mustachios were exquisitely narrow, homogeneously downward, and made of something like black corn-silk. Behind <i xml:lang="fr">les nouveaux</i> staggered four <i xml:lang="fr">paillasses</i> motivated mysteriously by two pair of small legs belonging (as it proved) to Garibaldi and the little Machine-Fixer; who, coincident with the tumbling of the mattresses to the floor, perspiringly emerged to sight.</p>
			<p>The first thing the shifty-eyed Hollander did was to exclaim <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i>. The first thing the whiskery Belgian did was to grab his <i xml:lang="fr">paillasse</i> and stand guard over it. The first thing the youth in the leggings did was to stare helplessly about him, murmuring something whimperingly in Polish. The first thing the fourth nouveau did was pay no attention to anybody; lighting a cigarette in an unhurried manner as he did so, and puffing silently and slowly as if in all the universe nothing whatever save the taste of tobacco existed.</p>
			<p>A bevy of Hollanders were by this time about the triangle, asking him all at once Was he from so and so, What was in his box. How long had he been in coming, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Half a dozen stooped over the box itself, and at least three pairs of hands were on the point of trying the lock⁠—when suddenly with incredible agility the unperturbed smoker shot a yard forward, landing quietly beside them; and exclaimed rapidly and briefly through his nose.</p>
			<p>“<em>Mang.</em>”</p>
			<p>He said it almost petulantly, or as a child says “Tag! You’re it.”</p>
			<p>The onlookers recoiled, completely surprised. Whereat the frightened youth in black puttees sidled over and explained with a pathetic, at once ingratiating and patronising, accent:</p>
			<p>“He is not nasty. He’s a good fellow. He’s my friend. He wants to say that it’s his, that box. He doesn’t speak French.”</p>
			<p>“It’s the <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i> Polak’s box,” said the Triangular Man exploding in Dutch. “They’re a pair of Polakers; and this man” (with a twist of his pale-blue eyes in the direction of the Bewhiskered One) “and I had to carry it all the <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i> way to this <i xml:lang="de">Gottverdummer</i> place.”</p>
			<p>All this time the incognizable nouveau was smoking slowly and calmly, and looking at nothing at all with his black buttonlike eyes. Upon his face no faintest suggestion of expression could be discovered by the hungry minds which focused unanimously upon its almost stern contours. The deep furrows in the cardboardlike cheeks (furrows which resembled slightly the gills of some extraordinary fish, some unbreathing fish) moved not an atom. The moustache drooped in something like mechanical tranquillity. The lips closed occasionally with a gesture at once abstracted and sensitive upon the lightly and carefully held cigarette; whose curling smoke accentuated the poise of the head, at once alert and uninterested.</p>
			<p>Monsieur Auguste broke in, speaking, as I thought, Russian⁠—and in an instant he and the youth in puttees and the Unknowable’s cigarette and the box and the Unknowable had disappeared through the crowd in the direction of Monsieur Auguste’s paillasse, which was also the direction of the paillasse belonging to the Cordonnier as he was sometimes called⁠—a diminutive man with immense mustachios of his own who promenaded with Monsieur Auguste, speaking sometimes French but, as a general rule, Russian or Polish.</p>
			<p>Which was my first glimpse, and is the reader’s, of the Zulu; he being one of the Delectable Mountains. For which reason I shall have more to say of him later, when I ascend the Delectable Mountains in a separate chapter or chapters; till when the reader must be content with the above, however unsatisfactory description.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>One of the most utterly repulsive personages whom I have met in my life⁠—perhaps (and on second thought I think certainly) the most utterly repulsive⁠—was shortly after this presented to our midst by the considerate French government. I refer to The Fighting Sheeney. Whether or no he arrived after the Spanish Whoremaster I cannot say. I remember that Bill the Hollander⁠—which was the name of the triangular rope-belted man with shifty blue eyes (co-<i xml:lang="fr">arrivé</i> with the whiskey Belgian; which Belgian, by the way, from his not to be exaggerated brutal look, <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and myself called The Baby-snatcher)⁠—upon his arrival told great tales of a Spanish millionaire with whom he had been in prison just previous to his discovery of La Ferté. “He’ll be here too in a couple o’ days,” added Bill the Hollander, who had been fourteen years in These United States, spoke the language to a T, talked about “The America Lakes,” and was otherwise amazingly well acquainted with The Land of The Free. And sure enough, in less than a week one of the fattest men whom I have ever laid eyes on, overdressed, much beringed and otherwise wealthy-looking, arrived⁠—and was immediately played up to by Judas (who could smell cash almost as far as <i xml:lang="fr">le gouvernement français</i> could smell sedition) and, to my somewhat surprise, by the utterly respectable Count Bragard. But most emphatically <strong>not</strong> by Mexique, who spent a half-hour talking to the nouveau in his own tongue, then drifted placidly over to our beds and informed us:</p>
			<p>“You see dat feller over dere, dat fat feller? I speak Spanish to him. He no good. Tell me he make fifty thousand franc last year runnin’ whorehouse in” (I think it was) “Brest. Son of bitch!”</p>
			<p>“Dat fat feller” lived in a perfectly huge bed which he contrived to have brought up for him immediately upon his arrival. The bed arrived in a knockdown state and with it a mechanician from <i xml:lang="fr">la ville</i>, who set about putting it together, meanwhile indulging in many glances expressive not merely of interest but of amazement and even fear. I suppose the bed had to be of a special size in order to accommodate the circular millionaire and being an extraordinary bed required the services of a skilled artisan⁠—at all events, “dat fat feller’s” couch put the Skipper’s altogether in the shade. As I watched the process of construction it occurred to me that after all here was the last word in luxury⁠—to call forth from the metropolis not only a special divan but with it a special slave, the Slave of the Bed.⁠ ⁠… “Dat fat feller” had one of the prisoners perform his <i xml:lang="fr">corvée</i> for him. “Dat fat feller” bought enough at the canteen twice every day to stock a transatlantic liner for seven voyages, and never ate with the prisoners. I will mention him again apropos the Mecca of respectability, the Great White Throne of purity, Three rings Three⁠—alias Count Bragard, to whom I have long since introduced my reader.</p>
			<p>So we come, willy-nilly, to The Fighting Sheeney.</p>
			<p>The Fighting Sheeney arrived carrying the expensive suitcase of a livid, strangely unpleasant-looking Romanian gent, who wore a knit sweater of a strangely ugly red hue, impeccable clothes, and an immaculate velour hat which must have been worth easily fifty francs. We called this gent Rockyfeller. His personality might be faintly indicated by the adjective Disagreeable. The porter was a creature whom Ugly does not even slightly describe. There are some specimens of humanity in whose presence one instantly and instinctively feels a profound revulsion, a revulsion which⁠—perhaps because it is profound⁠—cannot be analysed. The Fighting Sheeney was one of these specimens. His face (or to use the good American idiom, his mug) was exceedingly coarse-featured and had an indefatigable expression of sheer brutality⁠—yet the impression which it gave could not be traced to any particular plane or line. I can and will say, however, that this face was most hideous⁠—perhaps that is the word⁠—when it grinned. When The Fighting Sheeney grinned you felt that he desired to eat you, and was prevented from eating you only by a superior desire to eat everybody at once. He and Rockyfeller came to us from, I think it was, the Santé; both accompanied <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> to Précigne. During the weeks which The Fighting Sheeney spent at La Ferté Macé, the nonexistence of the inhabitants of The Enormous Room was rendered something more than miserable. It was rendered well-nigh unbearable.</p>
			<p>The night Rockyfeller and his slave arrived was a night to be remembered by everyone. It was one of the wildest and strangest and most perfectly interesting nights I, for one, ever spent. Rockyfeller had been corralled by Judas, and was enjoying a special bed to our right at the upper end of The Enormous Room. At the canteen he had purchased a large number of candles in addition to a great assortment of dainties which he and Judas were busily enjoying⁠—when the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> came up, counted us twice, divided by three, gave the order “<i xml:lang="fr">Lumières éteintes</i>,” and descended, locking the door behind him. Everyone composed himself for miserable sleep. Everyone except Judas, who went on talking to Rockyfeller, and Rockyfeller, who proceeded to light one of his candles and begin a pleasant and conversational evening. The Fighting Sheeney lay stark-naked on a paillasse between me and his lord. The Fighting Sheeney told everyone that to sleep stark-naked was to avoid bugs (whereof everybody, including myself, had a goodly portion). The Fighting Sheeney was, however, quieted by the <i xml:lang="fr">planton’s</i> order; whereas Rockyfeller continued to talk and munch to his heart’s content. This began to get on everybody’s nerves. Protests in a number of languages arose from all parts of The Enormous Room. Rockyfeller gave a contemptuous look around him and proceeded with his conversation. A curse emanated from the darkness. Up sprang The Fighting Sheeney, stark naked; strode over to the bed of the curser, and demanded ferociously:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Boxe? Vous!</i>”</p>
			<p>The curser was apparently fast asleep, and even snoring. The Fighting Sheeney turned away disappointed, and had just reached his paillasse when he was greeted by a number of uproariously discourteous remarks uttered in all sorts of tongues. Over he rushed, threatened, received no response, and turned back to his place. Once more ten or twelve voices insulted him from the darkness. Once more The Fighting Sheeney made for them, only to find sleeping innocents. Again he tried to go to bed. Again the shouts arose, this time with redoubled violence and in greatly increased number. The Fighting Sheeney was at his wits’ end. He strode about challenging everyone to fight, receiving not the slightest recognition, cursing, reviling, threatening, bullying. The darkness always waited for him to resume his mattress, then burst out in all sorts of maledictions upon his head and the sacred head of his lord and master. The latter was told to put out his candle, go to sleep and give the rest a chance to enjoy what pleasure they might in forgetfulness of their woes. Whereupon he appealed to The Sheeney to stop this. The Sheeney (almost weeping) said he had done his best, that everyone was a pig, that nobody would fight, that it was disgusting. Roars of applause. Protests from the less strenuous members of our circle against the noise in general: Let him have his <i xml:lang="fr">foutue</i> candle, Shut up, Go to sleep yourself, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Rockyfeller kept on talking (albeit visibly annoyed by the ill-breeding of his fellow-captives) to the smooth and oily Judas. The noise, or rather noises, increased. I was for some reason angry at Rockyfeller⁠—I think I had a curious notion that if I couldn’t have a light after “<i xml:lang="fr">lumières éteintes</i>” and if my very good friends were none of them allowed to have one, then, by God! neither should Rockyfeller. At any rate, I passed a few remarks calculated to wither the by this time a little nervous Übermensch; got up, put on some enormous sabots (which I had purchased from a horrid little boy whom the French Government had arrested with his parent, for some cause unknown⁠—which horrid little boy told me that he had “found” the sabots “in a train” on the way to La Ferté) shook myself into my fur coat, and banged as noisemakingly as I knew how over to One Eyed Dah-veed’s paillasse, where Mexique joined us. “It is useless to sleep,” said One Eyed Dah-veed in French and Spanish. “True,” I agreed; “therefore, let’s make all the noise we can.”</p>
			<p>Steadily the racket bulged in the darkness. Human cries, quips and profanity had now given place to wholly inspired imitations of various, not to say sundry, animals. Afrique exclaimed⁠—with great pleasure I recognised his voice through the impenetrable gloom:</p>
			<p>“Agahagahagahagahagah!”</p>
			<p>—“perhaps,” said I, “he means a machine gun; it sounds like either that or a monkey.” The Wanderer crowed beautifully. Monsieur Auguste’s bosom friend, <i xml:lang="fr">le Cordonnier</i>, uttered an astonishing:</p>
			<p>“Meeee-oooooo<strong>ow</strong>!”</p>
			<p>which provoked a tornado of laughter and some applause. Mooings, chirpings, cacklings⁠—there was a superb hen⁠—neighings, he-hawing, roarings, bleatings, growlings, quackings, peepings, screamings, bellowings, and⁠—something else, of course⁠—set The Enormous Room suddenly and entirely alive. Never have I imagined such a menagerie as had magically instated itself within the erstwhile soggy and dismal four walls of our chamber. Even such staid characters as Count Bragard set up a little bawling. Monsieur Pet-airs uttered a tiny aged crowing to my immense astonishment and delight. The dying, the sick, the ancient, the mutilated, made their contributions to the common pandemonium. And then, from the lower left darkness, sprouted one of the very finest noises which ever fell on human ears⁠—the noise of a little dog with floppy ears who was tearing after something on very short legs and carrying his very fuzzy tail straight up in the air as he tore; a little dog who was busier than he was wise, louder than he was big; a red-tongued, foolish breathless, intent little dog with black eyes and a great smile and woolly paws⁠—which noise, conceived and executed by The Lobster, sent The Enormous Room into an absolute and incurable hysteria.</p>
			<p>The Fighting Sheeney was at a standstill. He knew not how to turn. At last he decided to join with the insurgents, and wailed brutally and dismally. That was the last straw: Rockyfeller, who could no longer (even by shouting to Judas) make himself heard, gave up conversation and gazed angrily about him; angrily yet fearfully, as if he expected some of these numerous bears, lions, tigers and baboons to leap upon him from the darkness. His livid super-disagreeable face trembled with the flickering cadence of the candle. His lean lips clenched with mortification and wrath. “<i xml:lang="fr">Vous êtes chef de chambre</i>,” he said fiercely to Judas⁠—“why don’t you make the men stop this? <i xml:lang="fr">C’est emmerdant.</i>” “Ah,” replied Judas smoothly and insinuatingly⁠—“They are only men, and boors at that; you can’t expect them to have any manners.” A tremendous group of Something Elses greeted this remark together with cries, insults, groans and linguistic trumpetings. I got up and walked the length of the room to the cabinet (situated as always by this time of night in a pool which was in certain places six inches deep, from which pool my sabots somewhat protected me) and returned, making as loud a clattering as I was able. Suddenly the voice of Monsieur Auguste leaped through the din in an</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Alors! c’est as-sez.</i>”</p>
			<p>The next thing we knew he had reached the window just below the cabinet (the only window, by the way, not nailed up with good long wire nails for the sake of warmth) and was shouting in a wild, high, gentle, angry voice to the sentinel below:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Plan-ton!</i> It is impos-si-ble to sleep!”</p>
			<p>A great cry: “Yes! I am coming!” floated up⁠—every single noise dropped⁠—Rockyfeller shot out his hand for the candle, seized it in terror, blew it out as if blowing it out were the last thing he would do in this life⁠—and The Enormous Room hung silent; enormously dark, enormously expectant.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p><strong>Bang!</strong> Open the door. “<i xml:lang="fr">Alors, qui, m’appelle? Qu’est-ce qu’on a foutu ici.</i>” And the Black Holster, revolver in hand, flashed his torch into the inky stillness of the chamber. Behind him stood two <i xml:lang="fr">plantons</i> white with fear; their trembling hands clutching revolvers, the barrels of which shook ludicrously.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">C’est moi, plan-ton!</i>” Monsieur Auguste explained that no one could sleep because of the noise, and that the noise was because “<i xml:lang="fr">ce monsieur là</i>” would not extinguish his candle when everyone wanted to sleep. The Black Holster turned to the room at large and roared: “You children of <i xml:lang="fr">Merde</i> don’t let this happen again or I’ll fix you every one of you.”⁠—Then he asked if anyone wanted to dispute this assertion (he brandishing his revolver the while) and was answered by peaceful snorings. Then he said by X Y and Z he’d fix the noisemakers in the morning and fix them good⁠—and looked for approbation to his trembling assistants. Then he swore twenty or thirty times for luck, turned, and thundered out on the heels of his fleeing <i xml:lang="fr">confrères</i> who almost tripped over each other in their haste to escape from The Enormous Room. Never have I seen a greater exhibition of bravery than was afforded by The Black Holster, revolver in hand, holding at bay the snoring and weaponless inhabitants of The Enormous Room. <i xml:lang="fr">Vive les plantons.</i> He should have been a gendarme.</p>
			<p>Of course Rockyfeller, having copiously tipped the officials of La Ferté upon his arrival, received no slightest censure nor any hint of punishment for his deliberate breaking of an established rule⁠—a rule for the breaking of which anyone of the common scum (<abbr class="initialism">e.g.</abbr>, thank God, myself) would have got <i xml:lang="fr">cabinot de suite</i>. No indeed. Several of <i xml:lang="fr">les hommes</i>, however, got <i xml:lang="fr">pain sec</i>⁠—not because they had been caught in an act of vociferous protestation by the Black Holster, which they had not⁠—but just on principle, as a warning to the rest of us and to teach us a wholesome respect for (one must assume) law and order. One and all, they heartily agreed that it was worth it. Everyone knew, of course, that the Spy had peached. For, by Jove, even in The Enormous Room there was a man who earned certain privileges and acquired a complete immunity from punishment by squealing on his fellow-sufferers at each and every opportunity. A really ugly person, with a hard knuckling face and treacherous hands, whose daughter lived downstairs in a separate room apart from <i xml:lang="fr">les putains</i> (against which “dirty,” “filthy,” “whores” he could not say enough⁠—“Hi’d rather die than ’ave my daughter with them stinkin’ ’ores,” remarked once to me this strictly moral man, in Cockney English) and whose daughter (aged thirteen) was generally supposed to serve in a pleasurable capacity. One did not need to be warned against the Spy (as both <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I were warned, upon our arrival)⁠—a single look at that phiz was enough for anyone partially either intelligent or sensitive. This phiz or mug had, then, squealed. Which everyone took as a matter of course and admitted among themselves that hanging was too good for him.</p>
			<p>But the vast and unutterable success achieved by the <i xml:lang="fr">Menagerie</i> was this⁠—Rockyfeller, shortly after, left our ill-bred society for “<i xml:lang="fr">l’hôpital</i>”; the very same “hospital” whose comforts and seclusion Monsieur le Surveillant had so dextrously recommended to <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and myself. Rockyfeller kept The Fighting Sheeney in his way, in order to defend him when he went on promenade; otherwise our connection with him was definitely severed, his new companions being Muskowitz the Cockeyed Millionaire, and The Belgian Song Writer⁠—who told everyone to whom he spoke that he was a government official (“<i xml:lang="fr">de la blague</i>” cried the little Machine-Fixer, “<i xml:lang="fr">c’est un menteur!</i>” Adding that he knew of this person in Belgium and that this person was a man who wrote popular ditties). Would to Heaven we had got rid of the slave as well as the master⁠—but unfortunately The Fighting Sheeney couldn’t afford to follow his lord’s example. So he went on making a nuisance of himself, trying hard to curry favour with <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and me, getting into fights and bullying everyone generally.</p>
			<p>Also this lionhearted personage spent one whole night shrieking and moaning on his paillasse after an injection by Monsieur Richard⁠—for syphilis. Two or three men were, in the course of a few days, discovered to have had syphilis for some time. They had it in their mouths. I don’t remember them particularly, except that at least one was a Belgian. Of course they and The Fighting Sheeney had been using the common dipper and drink pail. <i xml:lang="fr">Le gouvernement français</i> couldn’t be expected to look out for a little thing like venereal disease among prisoners: didn’t it have enough to do curing those soldiers who spent their time on permission trying their best to infect themselves with both gonorrhea and syphilis? Let not the reader suppose I am daydreaming: let him rather recall that I had had the honour of being a member of Section Sanitaire Vingt-et-Un, which helped evacuate the venereal hospital at Ham, with whose inhabitants (in odd moments) I talked and walked and learned several things about <i xml:lang="fr">la guerre</i>. Let the reader⁠—if he does not realise it already⁠—realise that This Great War for Humanity, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, did not agree with some people’s ideas, and that some people’s ideas made them prefer to the glories of the front line the torments (I have heard my friends at Ham screaming a score of times) attendant upon venereal diseases. Or as one of my aforesaid friends told me⁠—after discovering that I was, in contrast to <i xml:lang="fr">les américains</i>, not bent upon making France discover America but rather upon discovering France and <i xml:lang="fr">les français</i> myself:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Mon vieux</i>, it’s quite simple. I go on leave. I ask to go to Paris, because there are prostitutes there who are totally diseased. I catch syphilis, and, when possible gonorrhea also. I come back. I leave for the front line. I am sick. The hospital. The doctor tells me: you must not smoke or drink, then you will be cured quickly. ‘Thanks, doctor!’ I drink all the time and I smoke all the time and I do not get well. I stay five, six, seven weeks. Perhaps a few months. At last, I am well. I rejoin my regiment. And now it is my turn to go on leave. I go. Again the same thing. It’s very pretty, you know.”</p>
			<p>But about the syphilitics at La Ferté: they were, somewhat tardily to be sure, segregated in a very small and dirty room⁠—for a matter of, perhaps, two weeks. And the Surveillant actually saw to it that during this period they ate <i xml:lang="fr">la soupe</i> out of individual china bowls.</p>
			<p>I scarcely know whether The Fighting Sheeney made more of a nuisance of himself during his decumbiture or during the period which followed it⁠—which period houses an astonishing number of fights, rows, bullyings, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> He must have had a light case for he was cured in no time, and on everyone’s back as usual. Well, I will leave him for the nonce; in fact, I will leave him until I come to The Young Pole, who wore black puttees and spoke of The Zulu as “<i xml:lang="fr">mon ami</i>”⁠—the Young Pole whose troubles I will recount in connection with the second Delectable Mountain Itself. I will leave the Sheeney with the observation that he was almost as vain as he was vicious; for with what ostentation, one day when we were in the kitchen, did he show me a postcard received that afternoon from Paris, whereon I read “Comme vous êtes beau” and promises to send more money as fast as she earned it and, hoping that he had enjoyed her last present, the signature (in a big, adoring hand)</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Ta môme. Alice.</i>”</p>
			<p>and when I had read it⁠—sticking his map up into my face, The Fighting Sheeney said with emphasis:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">No travailler moi. Femme travaille, fait la noce, tout le temps. Toujours avec officiers anglais. Gagne beaucoup, cent francs, deux cent francs, trois cent francs, toutes les nuits. Anglais riches. Femme me donne tout. Moi no travailler. Bon, eh?</i>”</p>
			<p>Grateful for this little piece of information, and with his leer an inch from my chin, I answered slowly and calmly that it certainly was. I might add that he spoke Spanish by preference (according to Mexique very bad Spanish); for The Fighting Sheeney had made his home for a number of years in Rio, and his opinion thereof may be loosely translated by the expressive phrase, “it’s a swell town.”</p>
			<p>A charming fellow, The Fighting Sheeney.</p>
			<p>Now I must tell you what happened to the poor Spanish Whoremaster. I have already noted the fact that Count Bragard conceived an immediate fondness for this rolypoly individual, whose belly⁠—as he lay upon his back of a morning in bed⁠—rose up with the sheets, blankets and quilts as much as two feet above the level of his small, stupid head studded with chins. I have said that this admiration on the part of the admirable Count and <abbr class="initialism">R.A.</abbr> for a personage of the Spanish Whoremaster’s profession somewhat interested me. The fact is, a change had recently come in our own relations with Vanderbilt’s friend. His cordiality toward <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and myself had considerably withered. From the time of our arrivals the good nobleman had showered us with favours and advice. To me, I may say, he was even extraordinarily kind. We talked painting, for example: Count Bragard folded a piece of paper, tore it in the centre of the folded edge, unfolded it carefully, exhibiting a good round hole, and remarking: “Do you know this trick? It’s an English trick, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cummings,” held the paper before him and gazed profoundly through the circular aperture at an exceptionally disappointing section of the altogether gloomy landscape, visible thanks to one of the ecclesiastical windows of The Enormous Room. “Just look at that, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cummings,” he said with quiet dignity. I looked. I tried my best to find something to the left. “No, no, straight through,” Count Bragard corrected me. “There’s a lovely bit of landscape,” he said sadly. “If I only had my paints here. I thought, you know, of asking my housekeeper to send them on from Paris⁠—but how can you paint in a bloody place like this with all these bloody pigs around you? It’s ridiculous to think of it. And it’s tragic, too,” he added grimly, with something like tears in his grey, tired eyes.</p>
			<p>Or we were promenading The Enormous Room after supper⁠—the evening promenade in the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i> having been officially eliminated owing to the darkness and the cold of the autumn twilight⁠—and through the windows the dull bloating colours of sunset pouring faintly; and the Count stops dead in his tracks and regards the sunset without speaking for a number of seconds. Then⁠—“it’s glorious, isn’t it?” he asks quietly. I say “Glorious indeed.” He resumes his walk with a sigh, and I accompany him. “<i xml:lang="fr">Ce n’est pas difficile à peindre, un coucher du soleil</i>, it’s not hard,” he remarks gently. “No?” I say with deference. “Not hard a bit,” the Count says, beginning to use his hands. “You only need three colours, you know. Very simple.” “Which colours are they?” I inquire ignorantly. “Why, you know of course,” he says surprised. “Burnt sienna, cadmium yellow, and⁠—er⁠—there! I can’t think of it. I know it as well as I know my own face. So do you. Well, that’s stupid of me.”</p>
			<p>Or, his worn eyes dwelling benignantly upon my duffle-bag, he warns me (in a low voice) of Prussian Blue.</p>
			<p>“Did you notice the portrait hanging in the bureau of the Surveillant?” Count Bragard inquired one day. “That’s a pretty piece of work, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cummings. Notice it when you get a chance. The green moustache, particularly fine. School of Cézanne.”⁠—“Really?” I said in surprise.⁠—“Yes, indeed,” Count Bragard said, extracting his tired-looking hands from his tired-looking trousers with a cultured gesture. “Fine young fellow painted that. I knew him. Disciple of the master. Very creditable piece of work.”⁠—“Did you ever see Cézanne?” I ventured.⁠—“Bless you, yes, scores of times,” he answered almost pityingly.⁠—“What did he look like?” I asked, with great curiosity.⁠—“Look like? His appearance, you mean?” Count Bragard seemed at a loss. “Why he was not extraordinary looking. I don’t know how you could describe him. Very difficult in English. But you know a phrase we have in French, ‘<i xml:lang="fr">l’air pesant</i>’; I don’t think there’s anything in English for it; <i xml:lang="fr">il avait l’air pesant</i>, Cézanne, if you know what I mean.</p>
			<p>“I should work, I should not waste my time,” the Count would say almost weepingly. “But it’s no use, my things aren’t here. And I’m getting old too; couldn’t concentrate in this stinking hole of a place, you know.”</p>
			<p>I did some hasty drawings of Monsieur Pet-airs washing and rubbing his bald head with a great towel in the dawn. The <abbr class="initialism">R.A.</abbr> caught me in the act and came over shortly after, saying, “Let me see them.” In some perturbation (the subject being a particular friend of his) I showed one drawing. “Very good, in fact, excellent,” the <abbr class="initialism">R.A.</abbr> smiled whimsically. “You have a real talent for caricature, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cummings, and you should exercise it. You really got Peters. Poor Peters, he’s a fine fellow, you know; but this business of living in the muck and filth, <i xml:lang="fr">c’est malheureux</i>. Besides, Peters is an old man. It’s a dirty bloody shame, that’s what it is. A bloody shame that all of us here should be forced to live like pigs with this scum!</p>
			<p>“I tell you what, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cummings,” he said, with something like fierceness, his weary eyes flashing, “I’m getting out of here shortly, and when I do get out (I’m just waiting for my papers to be sent on by the French consul) I’ll not forget my friends. We’ve lived together and suffered together and I’m not a man to forget it. This hideous mistake is nearly cleared up, and when I go free I’ll do anything for you and your chum. Anything I can do for you I’d be only too glad to do it. If you want me to buy you paints when I’m in Paris, nothing would give me more pleasure. I know French as well as I know my own language” (he most certainly did) “and whereas you might be cheated, I’ll get you everything you need <i xml:lang="fr">à bon marché</i>. Because you see they know me there, and I know just where to go. Just give me the money for what you need and I’ll get you the best there is in Paris for it. You needn’t worry”⁠—I was protesting that it would be too much trouble⁠—“my dear fellow, it’s no trouble to do a favour for a friend.”</p>
			<p>And to <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and myself <i xml:lang="fr">ensemble</i> he declared, with tears in his eyes, “I have some marmalade at my house in Paris, real marmalade, not the sort of stuff you buy these days. We know how to make it. You can’t get an idea how delicious it is. In big crocks”⁠—the Count said simply⁠—“well, that’s for you boys.” We protested that he was too kind. “Nothing of the sort,” he said, with a delicate smile. “I have a son in the English Army,” and his face clouded with worry, “and we send him some now and then, he’s crazy about it. I know what it means to him. And you shall share in it too. I’ll send you six crocks.” Then, suddenly looking at us with a pleasant expression, “By Jove!” the Count said, “do you like whiskey? Real Bourbon whiskey? I see by your look that you know what it is. But you never tasted anything like this. Do you know London?” I said no, as I had said once before. “Well, that’s a pity,” he said, “for if you did you’d know this bar. I know the barkeeper well, known him for thirty years. There’s a picture of mine hanging in his place. Look at it when you’re in London, drop in to ⸻ Street, you’ll find the place, anyone will tell you where it is. This fellow would do anything for me. And now I’ll tell you what I’ll do: you fellows give me whatever you want to spend and I’ll get you the best whiskey you ever tasted. It’s his own private stock, you understand. I’ll send it on to you⁠—God knows you need it in this place. I wouldn’t do this for anyone else, you understand,” and he smiled kindly; “but we’ve been prisoners together, and we understand each other, and that’s enough for gentlemen. I won’t forget you.” He drew himself up. “I shall write,” he said slowly and distinctly, “to Vanderbilt about you. I shall tell him it’s a dirty bloody shame that you two young Americans, gentlemen born, should be in this foul place. He’s a man who’s quick to act. He’ll not tolerate a thing like this⁠—an outrage, a bloody outrage, upon two of his own countrymen. We shall see what happens then.”</p>
			<p>It was during this period that Count Bragard lent us for our personal use his greatest treasure, a water glass. “I don’t need it,” he said simply and pathetically.</p>
			<p>Now, as I have said, a change in our relations came.</p>
			<p>It came at the close of one soggy, damp, raining afternoon. For this entire hopeless grey afternoon Count Bragard and <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> promenaded The Enormous Room. Bragard wanted the money⁠—for the whiskey and the paints. The marmalade and the letter to Vanderbilt were, of course, gratis. Bragard was leaving us. Now was the time to give him money for what we wanted him to buy in Paris and London. I spent my time rushing about, falling over things, upsetting people, making curious and secret signs to <abbr class="name">B.</abbr>, which signs, being interpreted, meant be careful! But there was no need of telling him this particular thing. When the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> announced <i xml:lang="fr">la soupe</i>, a fiercely weary face strode by me en route to his mattress and his spoon. I knew that <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> had been careful. A minute later he joined me, and told me as much.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>On the way downstairs we ran into the Surveillant. Bragard stepped from the ranks and poured upon the Surveillant a torrent of French, of which the substance was: you told them not to give me anything. The Surveillant smiled and bowed and wound and unwound his hands behind his back and denied anything of the sort.</p>
			<p>It seems that <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> had heard that the kindly nobleman wasn’t going to Paris at all.</p>
			<p>Moreover, Monsieur Pet-airs had said to <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> something about Count Bragard being a suspicious personage⁠—Monsieur Pet-airs, the <abbr class="initialism">R.A.</abbr>’s best friend.</p>
			<p>Moreover, as I have said, Count Bragard had been playing up to the poor Spanish Whoremaster to beat the band. Every day had he sat on a little stool beside the rolypoly millionaire, and written from dictation letter after letter in French⁠—with which language the rolypoly was sadly unfamiliar.⁠ ⁠… And when next day Count Bragard took back his treasure of treasures, his personal water glass, remarking briefly that he needed it once again, I was not surprised. And when, a week or so later, he left⁠—I was not surprised to have Mexique come up to us and placidly remark:</p>
			<p>“I give dat feller five francs. Tell me he send me overcoat, very good overcoat. But say: Please no tell anybody come from me. Please tell everybody your family send it.” And with a smile, “I t’ink dat feller fake.”</p>
			<p>Nor was I surprised to see, some weeks later, the poor Spanish Whoremaster rending his scarce hair as he lay in bed of a morning. And Mexique said with a smile:</p>
			<p>“Dat feller give dat English feller one hundred francs. Now he sorry.”</p>
			<p>All of which meant merely that Count Bragard should have spelt his name, not Bra-, but with an l.</p>
			<p>And I wonder to this day that the only letter of mine which ever reached America and my doting family should have been posted by this highly entertaining personage en ville, whither he went as a trusted inhabitant of La Ferté to do a few necessary errands for himself; whither he returned with a good deal of colour in his cheeks and a good deal of <i xml:lang="fr">vin rouge</i> in his guts; going and returning with Tommy, the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> who brought him The Daily Mail every day until Bragard couldn’t afford it, after which either <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I or Jean le Nègre took it off Tommy’s hands⁠—Tommy, for whom we had a delightful name which I sincerely regret being unable to tell, Tommy, who was an Englishman for all his French <i xml:lang="fr">planton’s</i> uniform and worshipped the ground on which the Count stood; Tommy, who looked like a boiled lobster and had tears in his eyes when he escorted his idol back to captivity.⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="fr">Mirabile dictu</i>, so it was.</p>
			<p>Well, such was the departure of a great man from among us.</p>
			<p>And now, just to restore the reader’s faith in human nature, let me mention an entertaining incident which occurred during the latter part of my stay at La Ferté Macé. Our society had been gladdened⁠—or at any rate galvanized⁠—by the biggest single contribution in its history; the arrival simultaneously of six purely extraordinary persons, whose names alone should be of more than general interest: The Magnifying Glass, The Trick Raincoat, The Messenger Boy, The Hat, The Alsatian, The Whitebearded Raper and His Son. In order to give the reader an idea of the situation created by these <i xml:lang="fr">arrivés</i>, which situation gives the entrance of the Washing Machine Man⁠—the entertaining incident, in other words⁠—its full and unique flavour, I must perforce sketch briefly each member of a truly imposing group. Let me say at once that, so terrible an impression did the members make, each inhabitant of The Enormous Room rushed at breakneck speed to his paillasse; where he stood at bay, assuming as frightening an attitude as possible. The Enormous Room was full enough already, in all conscience. Between sixty and seventy mattresses, with their inhabitants and, in nearly every case, baggage, occupied it so completely as scarcely to leave room for <i xml:lang="fr">le poêle</i> at the further end and the card table in the centre. No wonder we were struck with terror upon seeing the six nouveaux. Judas immediately protested to the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> who brought them up that there were no places, getting a roar in response and the door slammed in his face to boot. But the reader is not to imagine that it was the number alone of the arrivals which inspired fear and distrust⁠—their appearance was enough to shake anyone’s sanity. I do protest that never have I experienced a feeling of more profound distrust than upon this occasion; distrust of humanity in general and in particular of the following individuals:</p>
			<p>An old man shabbily dressed in a shiny frock coat, upon whose peering and otherwise very aged face a pair of dirty spectacles rested. The first thing he did, upon securing a place, was to sit upon his mattress in a professorial manner, tremulously extract a journal from his left coat pocket, tremblingly produce a large magnifying glass from his upper right vest pocket, and forget everything. Subsequently, I discovered him promenading the room with an enormous expenditure of feeble energy, taking tiny steps flat-footedly and leaning in when he rounded a corner as if he were travelling at terrific speed. He suffered horribly from rheumatism, could scarcely move after a night on the floor, and must have been at least sixty-seven years old.</p>
			<p>Second, a palish, foppish, undersized, prominent-nosed creature who affected a deep musical voice and the cut of whose belted raincoat gave away his profession⁠—he was a pimp, and proud of it, and immediately upon his arrival boasted thereof, and manifested altogether as disagreeable a species of bullying vanity as I ever (save in the case of The Fighting Sheeney) encountered. He got his from Jean le Nègre, as the reader will learn later.</p>
			<p>Third, a super-Western-Union-Messenger type of ancient-youth, extraordinarily unhandsome if not positively ugly. He had a weak pimply grey face, was clad in a brownish uniform, puttees (on pipestem calves), and a regular Messenger Boy cap. Upon securing a place he instantly went to the card-table, seated himself hurriedly, pulled out a batch of blanks, and wrote a telegram to (I suppose) himself. Then he returned to his paillasse, lay down with apparently supreme contentment, and fell asleep.</p>
			<p>Fourth, a tiny old man who looked like a caricature of an East Side secondhand clothes dealer⁠—having a long beard, a long, worn and dirty coat reaching just to his ankles, and a small derby hat on his head. The very first night his immediate neighbour complained that “Le Chapeau” (as he was christened by The Zulu) was guilty of fleas. A great tempest ensued immediately. A <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> was hastily summoned. He arrived, heard the case, inspected The Hat (who lay on his paillasse with his derby on, his hand far down the neck of his shirt, scratching busily and protesting occasionally his entire innocence), uttered (being the Black Holster) an oath of disgust, and ordered The Frog to “<i xml:lang="fr">couper les cheveux de suite et la barbe aussi; après il va au bain, le vieux</i>.” The Frog approached and gently requested The Hat to seat himself upon a chair⁠—the better of two chairs boasted by The Enormous Room. The Frog, successor to The Barber, brandished his scissors. The Hat lay and scratched. “<i xml:lang="fr">Allez, Nom de Dieu</i>” the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> roared. The poor Hat arose trembling, assumed a praying attitude; and began to talk in a thick and sudden manner. “<i xml:lang="fr">Asseyez-vous là, tête de cochon.</i>” The pitiful Hat obeyed, clutching his derby to his head in both withered hands. “Take off your hat, you son of a bitch,” the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> yelled. “I don’t want to,” the tragic Hat whimpered. <strong>Bang!</strong> the derby hit the floor, bounded upward and lay still. “Proceed,” the orderly thundered to The Frog, who regarded him with a perfectly inscrutable expression on his extremely keen face, then turned to his subject, snickered with the scissors, and fell to. Locks ear-long fell in crisp succession. Pete the Shadow, standing beside the barber, nudged me; and I looked; and I beheld upon the floor the shorn locks rising and curling with a movement of their own.⁠ ⁠… “Now for the beard,” said the Black Holster.⁠—“No, no, <i xml:lang="fr">Monsieur, s’il vous plaît, pas ma barbe, monsieur</i>”⁠—The Hat wept, trying to kneel.⁠—“<i xml:lang="fr">Ta gueule</i> or I’ll cut your throat,” the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> replied amiably; and The Frog, after another look, obeyed. And lo, the beard squirmed gently upon the floor, alive with a rhythm of its own; squirmed and curled crisply as it lay.⁠ ⁠… When The Hat was utterly shorn, he was bathed and became comparatively unremarkable, save for the worn long coat which he clutched about him, shivering. And he borrowed five francs from me twice, and paid me punctually each time when his own money arrived, and presented me with chocolate into the bargain, tipping his hat quickly and bowing (as he always did whenever he addressed anyone). Poor Old Hat, <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I and the Zulu were the only men at La Ferté who liked you.</p>
			<p>Fifth, a fat, jolly, decently dressed man.⁠—He had been to a camp where everyone danced, because an entire ship’s crew was interned there, and the crew were enormously musical, and the captain (having sold his ship) was rich and tipped the Director regularly; so everyone danced night and day, and the crew played, for the crew had brought their music with them.⁠—He had a way of borrowing the paper (<i xml:lang="fr">Le Matin</i>) which we bought from one of the lesser <i xml:lang="fr">plantons</i> who went to the town and got <i xml:lang="fr">Le Matin</i> there; borrowing it before we had read it⁠—by the sunset. And his favourite observations were:</p>
			<p>“It’s a rotten country. Dirty weather.”</p>
			<p>Fifth and sixth, a vacillating, staggering, decrepit creature with wildish white beard and eyes, who had been arrested⁠—incredibly enough⁠—for “rape.” With him his son, a pleasant youth quiet of demeanour, inquisitive of nature, with whom we sometimes conversed on the subject of the English Army.</p>
			<p>Such were the individuals whose concerted arrival taxed to its utmost the capacity of The Enormous Room. And now for my incident:</p>
			<p>In the doorway, one day shortly after the arrival of the gentlemen mentioned, quietly stood a well-dressed handsomely middle-aged man, with a sensitive face culminating in a groomed Van Dyck beard. I thought for a moment that the Mayor of Orne, or whatever his title is, had dropped in for an informal inspection of The Enormous Room. Thank God, I said to myself, it has never looked so chaotically filthy since I have had the joy of inhabiting it. And <i xml:lang="fr">sans blague</i>, The Enormous Room <em>was</em> in a state of really supreme disorder; shirts were thrown everywhere, a few twine clothes lines supported various pants, handkerchiefs and stockings, the stove was surrounded by a gesticulating group of nearly undressed prisoners, the stink was actually sublime.</p>
			<p>As the door closed behind him, the handsome man moved slowly and vigorously up The Enormous Room. His eyes were as big as turnips. His neat felt hat rose with the rising of his hair. His mouth opened in a gesture of unutterable astonishment. His knees trembled with surprise and terror, the creases of his trousers quivering. His hands lifted themselves slowly outward and upward till they reached the level of his head; moved inward till they grasped his head: and were motionless. In a deep awestruck resonant voice he exclaimed simply and sincerely:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Nom de nom de nom de nom de nom de <strong>dieu</strong>!</i>”</p>
			<p>Which introduces the reader to The Washing Machine Man, a Hollander, owner of a store at Brest where he sold the highly <i xml:lang="fr">utiles</i> contrivances which gave him his name. He, as I remember, had been charged with aiding and abetting in the case of escaping deserters⁠—but I know a better reason for his arrest: undoubtedly <i xml:lang="fr">le gouvernement français</i> caught him one day in the act of inventing a super-washing machine, in fact, a Whitewashing machine, for the private use of the Kaiser and His Family.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Which brings us, if you please, to the first Delectable Mountain.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
