<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V: A Group of Portraits</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Group of Portraits</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>With the reader’s permission I beg, at this point of my narrative, to indulge in one or two extrinsic observations.</p>
			<p>In the preceding pages I have described my Pilgrim’s Progress from the Slough of Despond, commonly known as <i xml:lang="fr">Section Sanitaire Vingt-et-Un</i> (then located at Germaine) through the mysteries of Noyon, Gré and Paris to the Porte de Triage de La Ferté Macé, Orne. With the end of my first day as a certified inhabitant of the latter institution a definite progression is brought to a close. Beginning with my second day at La Ferté a new period opens. This period extends to the moment of my departure and includes the discovery of The Delectable Mountains, two of which⁠—The Wanderer and I shall not say the other⁠—have already been sighted. It is like a vast grey box in which are laid helter-skelter a great many toys, each of which is itself completely significant apart from the always unchanging temporal dimension which merely contains it along with the rest. I make this point clear for the benefit of any of my readers who have not had the distinguished privilege of being in jail. To those who have been in jail my meaning is at once apparent; particularly if they have had the highly enlightening experience of being in jail with a perfectly indefinite sentence. How, in such a case, could events occur and be remembered otherwise than as individualities distinct from Time Itself? Or, since one day and the next are the same to such a prisoner, where does Time come in at all? Obviously, once the prisoner is habituated to his environment, once he accepts the fact that speculation as to when he will regain his liberty cannot possibly shorten the hours of his incarceration and may very well drive him into a state of unhappiness (not to say morbidity), events can no longer succeed each other: whatever happens, while it may happen in connection with some other perfectly distinct happenings, does not happen in a scale of temporal priorities⁠—each happening is self-sufficient, irrespective of minutes, months and the other treasures of freedom.</p>
			<p>It is for this reason that I do not purpose to inflict upon the reader a diary of my alternative aliveness and nonexistence at La Ferté⁠—not because such a diary would unutterably bore him, but because the diary or time method is a technique which cannot possibly do justice to timelessness. I shall (on the contrary) lift from their grey box at random certain (to me) more or less astonishing toys; which may or may not please the reader, but whose colours and shapes and textures are a part of that actual Present⁠—without future and past⁠—whereof they alone are cognizant who⁠—so to speak⁠—have submitted to an amputation of the world.</p>
			<p>I have already stated that La Ferté was a <i xml:lang="fr">Porte de Triage</i>⁠—that is to say, a place where suspects of all varieties were herded by <i xml:lang="fr">le gouvernement français</i> preparatory to their being judged as to their guilt by a Commission. If the Commission found that they were wicked persons or dangerous persons, or undesirable persons, or puzzling persons, or persons in some way insusceptible of analysis, they were sent from La Ferté to a “regular” prison, called Précigne, in the province of Sarthe. About Précigne the most awful rumors were spread. It was whispered that it had a huge moat about it, with an infinity of barbed wire fences thirty-feet high, and lights trained on the walls all night to discourage the escape of prisoners. Once in Précigne you were “in” for good and all, <i xml:lang="fr">pour la durée de la guerre</i>, which <i xml:lang="fr">durée</i> was a subject of occasional and dismal speculation⁠—occasional for reasons, as I have mentioned, of mental health; dismal for unreasons of diet, privation, filth, and other trifles. La Ferté was, then, a stepping stone either to freedom or to Précigne. But the excellent and inimitable and altogether benignant French Government was not satisfied with its own generosity in presenting one merely with Précigne⁠—beyond that lurked a <i xml:lang="fr">cauchemar</i> called by the singularly poetic name: Isle de Groix. A man who went to Isle de Groix was done.</p>
			<p>As the Surveillant said to us all, leaning out of a littlish window, and to me personally upon occasion⁠—</p>
			<p>“You are not prisoners. Oh, no. No indeed, I should say not. Prisoners are not treated like this. You are lucky.”</p>
			<p>I had <i xml:lang="fr">de la chance</i> all right, but that was something which the <i xml:lang="fr">pauvre</i> <abbr>M.</abbr> Surveillant wot altogether not of. As for my fellow-prisoners, I am sorry to say that he was⁠—it seems to my humble personality⁠—quite wrong. For who was eligible to La Ferté? Anyone whom the police could find in the lovely country of France (a) who was not guilty of treason (b) who could not prove that he was not guilty of treason. By treason I refer to any little annoying habits of independent thought or action which <i xml:lang="fr">en temps de guerre</i> are put in a hole and covered over, with the somewhat naive idea that from their cadavers violets will grow, whereof the perfume will delight all good men and true and make such worthy citizens forget their sorrows. Fort Leavenworth, for instance, emanates even now a perfume which is utterly delightful to certain Americans. Just how many La Fertés France boasted (and for all I know may still boast) God Himself knows. At least, in that Republic, amnesty has been proclaimed, or so I hear.⁠—But to return to the Surveillants remark.</p>
			<p><i xml:lang="fr">J’avais de la chance.</i> Because I am by profession a painter and a writer. Whereas my very good friends, all of them deeply suspicious characters, most of them traitors, without exception lucky to have the use of their cervical vertebrae, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, could (with a few exceptions) write not a word and read not a word; neither could they <i xml:lang="fr">faire la photographie</i> as Monsieur Auguste chucklingly called it (at which I blushed with pleasure): worst of all, the majority of these dark criminals who had been caught in nefarious plots against the honour of France were totally unable to speak French. Curious thing. Often I pondered the unutterable and inextinguishable wisdom of the police, who⁠—undeterred by facts which would have deceived less astute intelligences into thinking that these men were either too stupid or too simple to be connoisseurs of the art of betrayal⁠—swooped upon their helpless prey with that indescribable courage which is the prerogative of policemen the world over, and bundled it into the La Fertés of that mighty nation upon some, at least, of whose public buildings it seems to me that I remember reading:</p>
			<p>
				<i xml:lang="fr">Liberté.</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i xml:lang="fr">Egalité.</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i xml:lang="fr">Fraternité.</i>
			</p>
			<p>And I wondered that France should have a use for Monsieur Auguste, who had been arrested (because he was a Russian) when his fellow munition workers struck and whose wife wanted him in Paris because she was hungry and because their child was getting to look queer and white. Monsieur Auguste, that desperate ruffian exactly five feet tall who⁠—when he could not keep from crying (one must think about one’s wife or even one’s child once or twice, I merely presume, if one loves them⁠—“<i xml:lang="fr">et ma femme est très gen-tille, elle est fran-çaise et très belle, très, très belle, vrai-ment; elle n’est pas comme moi, un pet-it homme laid, ma femme est grande et belle, elle sait bien lire et é-crire, vrai-ment; et notre fils⁠ ⁠… vous dev-ez voir notre pet-it fils.⁠ ⁠…</i>”)⁠—used to start up and cry out, taking <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> by one arm and me by the other,</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Allons, mes amis! Chan-tons ‘Quackquackquack.’</i>”</p>
			<p>Whereupon we would join in the following song, which Monsieur Auguste had taught us with great care, and whose renditions gave him unspeakable delight:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song" xml:lang="fr">
				<p>
					<span>“Un canard, déployant ses ailes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Quackquackquack)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Il disait à sa canarde fidèle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Quackquackquack)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Il disait (Quackquackquack)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Il faisait (Quackquackquack)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quand” <i xml:lang="en-US">(spelling mine)</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“finirons nos desseins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quack.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quack.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quack.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Qua-</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ck.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I suppose I will always puzzle over the ecstasies of That Wonderful Duck. And how Monsieur Auguste, the merest gnome of a man, would bend backwards in absolute laughter at this song’s spirited conclusion upon a note so low as to wither us all.</p>
			<p>Then, too, the Schoolmaster.</p>
			<p>A little fragile old man. His trousers were terrifically too big for him. When he walked (in an insecure and frightened way) his trousers did the most preposterous wrinkles. If he leaned against a tree in the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i>, with a very old and also fragile pipe in his pocket⁠—the stem (which looked enormous in contrast to the owner) protruding therefrom⁠—his three-sizes too big collar would leap out so as to make his wizened neck appear no thicker than the white necktie which flowed upon his two-sizes too big shirt. He always wore a coat which reached below his knees, which coat, with which knees, perhaps someone had once given him. It had huge shoulders which sprouted, like wings, on either side of his elbows when he sat in The Enormous Room quietly writing at a tiny three-legged table, a very big pen walking away with his weak bony hand. His too big cap had a little button on top which looked like the head of a nail; and suggested that this old doll had once lost its poor grey head and had been repaired by means of tacking its head upon its neck, where it should be and properly belonged. Of what hideous crime was this being suspected? By some mistake he had three moustaches, two of them being eyebrows. He used to teach school in Alsace-Lorraine, and his sister is there. In speaking to you his kind face is peacefully reduced to triangles. And his tie buttons on every morning with a Bang! And off he goes; led about by his celluloid collar, gently worried about himself, delicately worried about the world. At eating time he looks sidelong as he stuffs soup into stiff lips. There are two holes where cheeks might have been. Lessons hide in his wrinkles. Bells ding in the oldness of eyes. Did he, by any chance, tell the children that there are such monstrous things as peace and good will⁠ ⁠… a corrupter of youth, no doubt⁠ ⁠… he is altogether incapable of anger, wholly timid and tintinnabulous. And he had always wanted so much to know⁠—if there were wild horses in America?</p>
			<p>Yes, probably the Schoolmaster was a notorious seditionist. The all-wise French Government has its ways, which like the ways of God are wonderful.</p>
			<p>I had almost forgot The Bear⁠—number two, not to be confused with the seeker of cigarette-ends. A big, shaggy person, a farmer, talked about “<i xml:lang="fr">mon petit jardin</i>,” an anarchist, wrote practically all the time (to the gentle annoyance of The Schoolmaster) at the queer-legged table; wrote letters (which he read aloud with evident satisfaction to himself) addressing “my confrères,” stimulating them to even greater efforts, telling them that the time was ripe, that the world consisted of brothers, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> I liked The Bear. He had a sincerity which, if somewhat startlingly uncouth, was always definitely compelling. His French itself was both uncouth and startling. I hardly think he was a dangerous bear. Had I been the French Government I should have let him go berrying, as a bear must and should, to his heart’s content. Perhaps I liked him best for his great awkward way of presenting an idea⁠—he scooped it out of its environment with a hearty paw in a way which would have delighted anyone save <i xml:lang="fr">le gouvernement français</i>. He had, I think,</p>
			<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
				<p>
					<b>Vive la Liberté</b>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">tattooed in blue and green on his big hairy chest. A fine bear. A bear whom no twitchings at his muzzle nor any starvation nor yet any beating could ever teach to dance⁠ ⁠… but then, I am partial to bears. Of course none of this bear’s letters ever got posted⁠—Le Directeur was not that sort of person; nor did this bear ever expect that they would go elsewhere than into the official wastebasket of La Ferté, which means that he wrote because he liked to; which again means that he was essentially an artist⁠—for which reason I liked him more than a little. He lumbered off one day⁠—I hope to his brier-patch, and to his children, and to his confrères, and to all things excellent and livable and highly desirable to a bruin.</p>
			<p>The Young Russian and The Barber escaped while I was enjoying my little visit at Orne. The former was an immensely tall and very strong boy of nineteen or under; who had come to our society by way of solitary confinement, bread and water for months, and other reminders that to err is human, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Unlike Harree, whom, if anything, he exceeded in strength, he was very quiet. Everyone let him alone. I “caught water” in the town with him several times and found him an excellent companion. He taught me the Russian numerals up to ten, and was very kind to my struggles over 10 and 9. He picked up the cannonball one day and threw it so hard that the wall separating the men’s <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i> from the <i xml:lang="fr">cour des femmes</i> shook, and a piece of stone fell off. At which the cannonball was taken away from us (to the grief of its daily wielders, Harree and Fritz) by four perspiring <i xml:lang="fr">plantons</i>, who almost died in the performance of their highly patriotic duty. His friend, The Barber, had a little shelf in The Enormous Room, all tricked out with an astonishing array of bottles, atomizers, tonics, powders, scissors, razors and other deadly implements. It has always been a <i xml:lang="fr">mystère</i> to me that our captors permitted this array of obviously dangerous weapons when we were searched almost weekly for knives. Had I not been in the habit of using <abbr class="name">B.</abbr>’s safety razor I should probably have become better acquainted with The Barber. It was not his price, nor yet his technique, but the fear of contamination which made me avoid these instruments of hygiene. Not that I shaved to excess. On the contrary, the Surveillant often, nay biweekly (so soon as I began drawing certain francs from Norton Harjes) reasoned with me upon the subject of appearance; saying that I was come of a good family, and I had enjoyed (unlike my companions) an education, and that I should keep myself neat and clean and be a shining example to the filthy and ignorant⁠—adding slyly that the “hospital” would be an awfully nice place for me and my friend to live, and that there we could be by ourselves like gentlemen and have our meals served in the room, avoiding the <i xml:lang="fr">salle a manger</i>; moreover, the food would be what we liked, delicious food, especially cooked⁠ ⁠… all (quoth the Surveillant with the itching palm of a Grand Central Porter awaiting his tip) for a mere trifle or so, which if I liked I could pay him on the spot⁠—whereat I scornfully smiled, being inhibited by a somewhat selfish regard for my own welfare from kicking him through the window. To The Barber’s credit be it said: he never once solicited my trade, although the Surveillant’s “<i xml:lang="fr">Soi-même</i>” (oneself) lectures (as <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I referred to them) were the delight of our numerous friends and must, through them, have reached his alert ears. He was a good-looking quiet man of perhaps thirty, with razor-keen eyes⁠—and that’s about all I know of him except that one day The Young Russian and The Barber, instead of passing from the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i> directly to the building, made use of a little door in an angle between the stone wall and the kitchen; and that to such good effect that we never saw them again. Nor were the ever-watchful guardians of our safety, the lionhearted <i xml:lang="fr">plantons</i>, aware of what had occurred until several hours after; despite the fact that a ten-foot wall had been scaled, some lesser obstructions vanquished, and a run in the open made almost (one unpatriotically minded might be tempted to say) before their very eyes. But then⁠—who knows? May not the French Government deliberately have allowed them to escape, after⁠—through its incomparable spy system⁠—learning that The Barber and his young friend were about to attempt the life of the Surveillant with an atomizer brimfull of <abbr class="initialism">T.N.T.</abbr>? Nothing could after all be more highly probable. As a matter of fact a couple of extra-fine razors (presented by the <i xml:lang="fr">Soi-même</i>-minded Surveillant to the wily coiffeur in the interests of public health) as well as a knife which belonged to the kitchen and had been lent to The Barber for the purpose of peeling potatoes⁠—he having complained that the extraordinary safety-device with which, on alternate days, we were ordinarily furnished for that purpose, was an insult to himself and his profession⁠—vanished into the rather thick air of Orne along with The Barber <i xml:lang="fr">lui-même</i>. I remember him perfectly in The Enormous Room, cutting apples deliberately with his knife and sharing them with the Young Russian. The night of the escape⁠—in order to keep up our morale⁠—we were helpfully told that both refugees had been snitched e’er they had got well without the limits of the town, and been remanded to a punishment consisting among other things, in <i xml:lang="fr">travaux forcés à perpetuité⁠—verbum sapientibus</i>, he that hath ears, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Also a nightly inspection was instituted; consisting of our being counted thrice by a <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i>, who then divided the total by three and vanished.</p>
			<p><i xml:lang="fr">Soi-même</i> reminds me of a pleasant spirit who graced our little company with a good deal of wit and elegance. He was called by <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and myself, after a somewhat exciting incident which I must not describe, but rather outline, by the agreeable title of Même le Balayeur. Only a few days after my arrival the incident in question happened. It seems (I was in <i xml:lang="fr">la cour</i> promenading for the afternoon) that certain more virile inhabitants of The Enormous Room, among them Harree and Pom Pom <i xml:lang="fr">bien entendu</i>, declined to <i xml:lang="fr">se promener</i> and kept their habitat. Now this was in fulfilment of a little understanding with three or more girls⁠—such as Celina, Lily and Renée⁠—who, having also declined the promenade, managed in the course of the afternoon to escape from their quarters on the second floor, rush down the hall and upstairs, and gain that landing on which was the only and well-locked door to The Enormous Room. The next act of this little comedy (or tragedy, as it proved for the participants, who got <i xml:lang="fr">cabinot</i> and <i xml:lang="fr">pain sec</i>⁠—male and female alike⁠—for numerous days thereafter) might well be entitled “Love will find a way.” Just how the door was opened, the lock picked, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, from the inside is (of course) a considerable mystery to anyone possessing a limited acquaintance with the art of burglary. Anyway it was accomplished, and that in several fifths of a second. Now let the curtain fall, and the reader be satisfied with the significant word “Asbestos,” which is part of all first-rate performances.</p>
			<p>The Surveillant, I fear, distrusted his <i xml:lang="fr">balayeur</i>. <i xml:lang="fr">Balayeurs</i> were always being changed because <i xml:lang="fr">balayeurs</i> were (in shameful contrast to the <i xml:lang="fr">plantons</i>) invariably human beings. For this deplorable reason they inevitably carried notes to and fro between <i xml:lang="fr">les hommes</i> and <i xml:lang="fr">les femmes</i>. Upon which ground the <i xml:lang="fr">balayeur</i> in this case⁠—a well-knit keen-eyed agile man, with a sense of humour and sharp perception of men, women and things in particular and in general⁠—was called before the bar of an impromptu court, held by <abbr>M.</abbr> le Surveillant in The Enormous Room after the promenade. I shall not enter in detail into the nature of the charges pressed in certain cases, but confine myself to quoting the close of a peroration which would have done Demosthenes credit:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Même le balayeur a tiré un coup!</i>”</p>
			<p>The individual in question mildly deprecated <abbr>M.</abbr> le Surveillant’s opinion, while the audience roared and rocked with laughter of a somewhat ferocious sort. I have rarely seen the Surveillant so pleased with himself as after producing this <i xml:lang="fr">bon mot</i>. Only fear of his superior, the ogre-like Directeur, kept him from letting off entirely all concerned in what after all (from the European point of view) was an essentially human proceeding. As nobody could prove anything about Même, he was not locked up in a dungeon; but he lost his job of sweeper⁠—which was quite as bad, I am sure, from his point of view⁠—and from that day became a common inhabitant of The Enormous Room like any of the rest of us.</p>
			<p>His successor, Garibaldi, was a corker.</p>
			<p>How the Almighty French Government in its Almighty Wisdom ever found Garibaldi a place among us is more than I understand or ever will. He was a little tot in a faded blue-grey French uniform; and when he perspired he pushed a kepi up and back from his worried forehead which a lock of heavy hair threateningly overhung. As I recollect Garibaldi’s terribly difficult, not to say complicated, lineage, his English mother had presented him to his Italian father in the country of France. However this trilogy may be, he had served at various times in the Italian, French and English armies. As there was (unless we call Garibaldi Italian, which he obviously was not) nary a subject of King Ponzi or Carruso or whatever be his name residing at La Ferté Macé, Garibaldi was in the habit of expressing himself⁠—chiefly at the card table, be it said⁠—in a curious language which might have been mistaken for French. To <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and me he spoke an equally curious language, but a perfectly recognizable one, <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Cockney Whitechapel English. He showed us a perfectly authentic mission-card which certified that his family had received a pittance from some charitable organisation situated in the Whitechapel neighbourhood, and that, moreover, they were in the habit of receiving this pittance; and that, finally, their claim to such pittance was amply justified by the poverty of their circumstances. Beyond this valuable certificate, Garibaldi (which everyone called him) attained great incoherence. He had been wronged. He was always being misunderstood. His life had been a series of mysterious tribulations. I for one have the merest idea that Garibaldi was arrested for the theft of some peculiarly worthless trifle, and sent to the Limbo of La Ferté as a penance. This merest idea is suggested by something which happened when The Clever Man instituted a search for his missing knife⁠—but I must introduce The Clever Man to my reader before describing that rather beguiling incident.</p>
			<p>Conceive a tall, well-dressed, rather athletic, carefully kept, clean and neat, intelligent, not for a moment despondent, altogether superior man, fairly young (perhaps twenty-nine) and quite bald. He wins enough every night at <i xml:lang="fr">banque</i> to enable him to pay the less fortunate to perform his <i xml:lang="fr">corvée d’eau</i> for him. As a consequence he takes his vile coffee in bed every morning, then smokes a cigarette or two lazily, then drops off for a nap, and gets up about the middle of the morning promenade. Upon arising he strops a razor of his own (nobody knows how he gets away with a regular razor), carefully lathers his face and neck⁠—while gazing into a rather classy mirror which hangs night and day over his head, above a little shelf on which he displays at such times a complete toilet outfit⁠—and proceeds to annihilate the inconsiderable growth of beard which his mirror reveals to him. Having completed the annihilation, he performs the most extensive ablutions per one of the three or four pails which The Enormous Room boasts, which pail is by common consent dedicated to his personal and exclusive use. All this time he has been singing loudly and musically the following sumptuously imaginative ditty:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“m<strong>ee</strong>t me ton<strong>i</strong>ght in <strong>drea</strong>mland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><strong>Un</strong>der the <strong>sil</strong>-v’ry m<strong>oo</strong>n,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>meet me in <strong>drea</strong>mland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sweet dreamy <strong>drea</strong>mland⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>there all my <strong>dre</strong>-ams come tr<strong>ue</strong>.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>His English accent is excellent. He pronounces his native language, which is the language of the Hollanders, crisply and firmly. He is not given to Gottverdummering. In addition to Dutch and English he speaks French clearly and Belgian distinctly. I daresay he knows half a dozen languages in all. He gives me the impression of a man who would never be at a loss, in whatever circumstances he might find himself. A man capable of extricating himself from the most difficult situation; and that with the greatest ease. A man who bides his time; and improves the present by separating, one after one, his monied fellow-prisoners from their banknotes. He is, by all odds, the coolest player that I ever watched. Nothing worries him. If he loses two hundred francs tonight, I am sure he will win it and fifty in addition tomorrow. He accepts opponents without distinction⁠—the stupid, the wily, the vain, the cautious, the desperate, the hopeless. He has not the slightest pity, not the least fear. In one of my numerous notebooks I have this perfectly direct paragraph:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Card table: 4 stares play banque with 2 cigarettes (1 dead) &amp; A pipe the clashing faces yanked by a leanness of one candle bottle-stuck (Birth of X) where sits The Clever Man who pyramids, sings (mornings) “Meet Me⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">which specimen of telegraphic technique, being interpreted, means: Judas, Garibaldi, and The Holland Skipper (whom the reader will meet <i xml:lang="fr">de suite</i>)⁠—Garibaldi’s cigarette having gone out, so greatly is he absorbed⁠—play <i xml:lang="fr">banque</i> with four intent and highly focused individuals who may or may not be The Schoolmaster, Monsieur Auguste, The Barber, and Même; with The Clever Man (as nearly always) acting as banker. The candle by whose somewhat uncorpulent illumination the various physiognomies are yanked into a ferocious unity is stuck into the mouth of a bottle. The lighting of the whole, the rhythmic disposition of the figures, construct a sensuous integration suggestive of The Birth of Christ by one of the Old Masters. The Clever Man, having had his usual morning warble, is extremely quiet. He will win, he pyramids⁠—and he pyramids because he has the cash and can afford to make every play a big one. All he needs is the rake of a croupier to complete his disinterested and wholly nerveless poise. He is a born gambler, is The Clever Man⁠—and I dare say that to play cards in time of war constituted a heinous crime and I am certain that he played cards before he arrived at La Ferté; moreover, I suppose that to win at cards in time of war is an unutterable crime, and I know that he has won at cards before in his life⁠—so now we have a perfectly good and valid explanation of the presence of The Clever Man in our midst. The Clever Man’s chief opponent was Judas. It was a real pleasure to us whenever of an evening Judas sweated and mopped and sweated and lost more and more and was finally cleaned out.</p>
			<p>But The Skipper, I learned from certain prisoners who escorted the baggage of The Clever Man from The Enormous Room when he left us one day (as he did for some reason, to enjoy the benefits of freedom), paid the mastermind of the card table 150 francs at the gate⁠—poor Skipper! upon whose vacant bed lay down luxuriously the Lobster, immediately to be wheeled fiercely all around The Enormous Room by the Guard Champêtre and Judas, to the boisterous plaudits of tout le monde⁠—but I started to tell about the afternoon when the mastermind lost his knife; and tell it I will forthwith. <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I were lying prone upon our respective beds when⁠—presto, a storm arose at the further end of The Enormous Room. We looked, and beheld The Clever Man, thoroughly and efficiently angry, addressing, threatening and frightening generally a constantly increasing group of fellow-prisoners. After dismissing with a few sharp linguistic cracks of the whip certain theories which seemed to be advanced by the bolder auditors with a view to palliating, persuading and tranquilizing his just wrath, he made for the nearest paillasse, turned it topsy-turvy, slit it neatly and suddenly from stem to stem with a jackknife, banged the hay about, and then went with careful haste through the pitifully minute baggage of the paillasse’s owner. Silence fell. No one, least of all the owner, said anything. From this bed The Clever Man turned to the next, treated it in the same fashion, searched it thoroughly, and made for the third. His motions were those of a perfectly oiled machine. He proceeded up the length of the room, varying his procedure only by sparing an occasional mattress, throwing paillasses about, tumbling <i xml:lang="fr">sacs</i> and boxes inside out; his face somewhat paler than usual but otherwise immaculate and expressionless. <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I waited with some interest to see what would happen to our belongings. Arriving at our beds he paused, seemed to consider a moment, then, not touching our paillasses proper, proceeded to open our duffle bags and hunt half-heartedly, remarking that “somebody might have put it in;” and so passed on. “What in hell is the matter with that guy?” I asked of Fritz, who stood near us with a careless air, some scorn and considerable amusement in his eyes. “The bloody fool’s lost his knife,” was Fritz’s answer. After completing his rounds The Clever Man searched almost everyone except ourselves and Fritz, and absolutely subsided on his own paillasse muttering occasionally “if he found it” what he’d do. I think he never did find it. It was a “beautiful” knife, John the Baigneur said. “What did it look like?” I demanded with some curiosity. “It had a naked woman on the handle” Fritz said, his eyes sharp with amusement.</p>
			<p>And everyone agreed that it was a great pity that The Clever Man had lost it, and everyone began timidly to restore order and put his personal belongings back in place and say nothing at all.</p>
			<p>But what amused me was to see the little tot in a bluish-grey French uniform, Garibaldi, who⁠—about when the search approached his paillasse⁠—suddenly hurried over to <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> (his perspiring forehead more perspiring than usual, his kepi set at an angle of insanity) and hurriedly presented <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> with a long-lost German silver folding camp-knife, purchased by <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> from a fellow-member of <i xml:lang="fr">Vingt-et-Un</i> who was known to us as “Lord Algie”⁠—a lanky, effeminate, brittle, spotless creature who was en route to becoming an officer and to whose finicky tastes the fat-jowled <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> tirelessly pandered, for, doubtless, financial considerations⁠—which knife according to the trembling and altogether miserable Garibaldi had “been found” by him that day in the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i>; which was eminently and above all things curious, as the treasure had been lost weeks before.</p>
			<p>Which again brings us to the Skipper, whose elaborate couch has already been mentioned⁠—he was a Hollander and one of the strongest, most gentle and altogether most pleasant of men, who used to sit on the water-wagon under the shed in the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i> and smoke his pipe quietly of an afternoon. His stocky even tightly-knit person, in its heavy-trousers and jersey sweater, culminated in a bronzed face which was at once as kind and firm a piece of supernatural work as I think I ever knew. His voice was agreeably modulated. He was utterly without affectation. He had three sons. One evening a number of gendarmes came to his house and told him that he was arrested, “so my three sons and I threw them all out of the window into the canal.”</p>
			<p>I can still see the opening smile, squared kindness of cheeks, eyes like cool keys⁠—his heart always with the Sea.</p>
			<p>The little Machine-Fixer (<i xml:lang="fr">le petit bonhomme avec le bras cassé</i> as he styled himself, referring to his little paralysed left arm) was so perfectly different that I must let you see him next. He was slightly taller than Garibaldi, about of a size with Monsieur Auguste. He and Monsieur Auguste together were a fine sight, a sight which made me feel that I came of a race of giants. I am afraid it was more or less as giants that <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I pitied the Machine-Fixer⁠—still this was not really our fault, since the Machine-Fixer came to us with his troubles much as a very minute and helpless child comes to a very large and omnipotent one. And God knows we did not only pity him, we liked him⁠—and if we could in some often ridiculous manner assist the Machine-Fixer I think we nearly always did. The assistance to which I refer was wholly spiritual; since the minute Machine-Fixer’s colossal self-pride eliminated any possibility of material assistance. What we did, about every other night, was to entertain him (as we entertained our other friends) <i xml:lang="fr">chez nous</i>; that is to say, he would come up late every evening or every other evening, after his day’s toil⁠—for he worked as co-sweeper with Garibaldi and he was a tremendous worker; never have I seen a man who took his work so seriously and made so much of it⁠—to sit, with great care and very respectfully, upon one or the other of our beds at the upper end of The Enormous Room, and smoke a black small pipe, talking excitedly and strenuously and fiercely about <i xml:lang="fr">La Misère</i> and himself and ourselves, often crying a little but very bitterly, and from time to time striking matches with a short angry gesture on the sole of his big, almost square boot. His little, abrupt, conscientious, relentless, difficult self lived always in a single dimension⁠—the somewhat beautiful dimension of Sorrow. He was a Belgian, and one of two Belgians in whom I have ever felt the least or slightest interest; for the Machine-Fixer might have been a Polak or an Idol or an Esquimo so far as his nationality affected his soul. By and large, that was the trouble⁠—the Machine-Fixer had a soul. Put the bracelets on an ordinary man, tell him he’s a bad egg, treat him rough, shove him into the jug or its equivalent (you see I have regard always for <abbr>M.</abbr> le Surveillant’s delicate but no doubt necessary distinction between La Ferté and Prison), and he will become one of three animals⁠—a rabbit, that is to say timid; a mole, that is to say stupid; or a hyena, that is to say Harree the Hollander. But if, by some fatal, some incomparably fatal accident, this man has a soul⁠—ah, then we have and truly have most horribly what is called in La Ferté Macé by those who have known it: <i xml:lang="fr">La Misère</i>. Monsieur Auguste’s valiant attempts at cheerfulness and the natural buoyancy of his gentle disposition in a slight degree protected him from <i xml:lang="fr">La Misère</i>. The Machine-Fixer was lost. By nature he was tremendously sensible, he was the very apotheosis of <i xml:lang="fr">l’ame sensible</i> in fact. His <i xml:lang="fr">sensibilité</i> made him shoulder not only the inexcusable injustice which he had suffered but the incomparable and overwhelming total injustice which everyone had suffered and was suffering en masse day and night in The Enormous Room. His woes, had they not sprung from perfectly real causes, might have suggested a persecution complex. As it happened there was no possible method of relieving them⁠—they could be relieved in only one way: by Liberty. Not simply by his personal liberty, but by the liberation of every single fellow-captive as well. His extraordinarily personal anguish could not be selfishly appeased by a merely partial righting, in his own case, of the Wrong⁠—the ineffable and terrific and to be perfectly avenged Wrong⁠—done to those who ate and slept and wept and played cards within that abominable and unyielding Symbol which enclosed the immutable vileness of our common life. It was necessary, for its appeasement, that a shaft of bright lightning suddenly and entirely should wither the human and material structures which stood always between our filthy and pitiful selves and the unspeakable cleanness of Liberty.</p>
			<p><abbr class="name">B.</abbr> recalls that the little Machine-Fixer said or hinted that he had been either a socialist or an anarchist when he was young. So that is doubtless why we had the privilege of his society. After all, it is highly improbable that this poor socialist suffered more at the hands of the great and good French government than did many a Conscientious Objector at the hands of the great and good American government; or⁠—since all great governments are per se good and vice versa⁠—than did many a man in general who was cursed with a talent for thinking during the warlike moments recently passed; during, that is to say, an epoch when the <abbr>g.</abbr> and <abbr>g.</abbr> nations demanded of their respective peoples the exact antithesis to thinking; said antitheses being vulgarly called Belief. Lest which statement prejudice some members of the American Legion in disfavour of the Machine-Fixer or rather of myself⁠—awful thought⁠—I hasten to assure everyone that the Machine-Fixer was a highly moral person. His morality was at times almost gruesome; as when he got started on the inhabitants of the women’s quarters. Be it understood that the Machine-Fixer was human, that he would take a letter⁠—provided he liked the sender⁠—and deliver it to the sender’s <i xml:lang="fr">adorée</i> without a murmur. That was simply a good deed done for a friend; it did not imply that he approved of the friend’s choice, which for strictly moral reasons he invariably and to the friend’s very face violently deprecated. To this little man of perhaps forty-five, with a devoted wife waiting for him in Belgium (a wife whom he worshipped and loved more than he worshipped and loved anything in the world, a wife whose fidelity to her husband and whose trust and confidence in him echoed in the letters which⁠—when we three were alone⁠—the little Machine-Fixer tried always to read to us, never getting beyond the first sentence or two before he broke down and sobbed from his feet to his eyes), to such a little person his reaction to <i xml:lang="fr">les femmes</i> was more than natural. It was in fact inevitable.</p>
			<p>Women, to him at least, were of two kinds and two kinds only. There were <i xml:lang="fr">les femmes honnêtes</i> and there were <i xml:lang="fr">les putains</i>. In La Ferté, he informed us⁠—and as <i xml:lang="fr">balayeur</i> he ought to have known whereof he spoke⁠—there were as many as three ladies of the former variety. One of them he talked with often. She told him her story. She was a Russian, of a very fine education, living peacefully in Paris up to the time that she wrote to her relatives a letter containing the following treasonable sentiment:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Je m’ennuie pour les neiges de Russie.</i>”</p>
			<p>The letter had been read by the French censor, as had <abbr class="name">B.</abbr>’s letter; and her arrest and transference from her home in Paris to La Ferté Macé promptly followed. She was as intelligent as she was virtuous and had nothing to do with her frailer sisters, so the Machine-Fixer informed us with a quickly passing flash of joy. Which sisters (his little forehead knotted itself and his big bushy eyebrows plunged together wrathfully) were wicked and indecent and utterly despicable disgraces to their sex⁠—and this relentless Joseph fiercely and jerkily related how only the day before he had repulsed the painfully obvious solicitations of a Madame Potiphar by turning his back, like a good Christian, upon temptation and marching out of the room, broom tightly clutched in virtuous hand.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">M’sieu Jean</i>” (meaning myself) “<i xml:lang="fr">savez-vous</i>”⁠—with a terrific gesture which consisted in snapping his thumbnail between his teeth⁠—“<strong><i xml:lang="fr">Ça pue!</i></strong>”</p>
			<p>Then he added: “And what would my wife say to me if I came home to her and presented her with that which this creature had presented to me? They are animals,” cried the little Machine-Fixer; “all they want is a man. They don’t care who he is; they want a man. But they won’t get me!” And he warned us to beware.</p>
			<p>Especially interesting, not to say valuable, was the Machine-Fixer’s testimony concerning the more or less regular “inspections” (which were held by the very same doctor who had “examined” me in the course of my first day at La Ferté) for <i xml:lang="fr">les femmes</i>; presumably in the interest of public safety. <i xml:lang="fr">Les femmes</i>, quoth the Machine-Fixer, who had been many times an eyewitness of this proceeding, lined up talking and laughing and⁠—crime of crimes⁠—smoking cigarettes, outside the <i xml:lang="fr">bureau</i> of <abbr>M.</abbr> le Médecin Major. “<i xml:lang="fr">Une femme entre. Elle se lève les jupes jusqu’au menton et se met sur le banc. Le médecin major la regarde. Il dit de suite ‘Bon. C’est tout.’ Elle sort. Une autre entre. La même chose. ‘Bon. C’est fini.’⁠ ⁠… M’sieu’ Jean: prenez garde!</i>”</p>
			<p>And he struck a match fiercely on the black, almost square boot which lived on the end of his little worn trouser-leg, bending his small body forward as he did so, and bringing the flame upward in a violent curve. The flame settled on his little black pipe, his cheeks sucked until they must have met, and a slow unwilling noise arose, and with the return of his cheeks a small colorless wisp of possibly smoke came upon the air.⁠—“That’s not tobacco. Do you know what it is? It’s wood! And I sit here smoking wood in my pipe when my wife is sick with worrying.⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="fr">M’sieu! Jean</i>”⁠—leaning forward with jaw protruding and a oneness of bristly eyebrows, “<i xml:lang="fr">Ces grands messieurs qui ne foutent pas mal si l’on <strong>creve</strong> de faim, savez-vous ils croient chacun qu’il est Le Bon Dieu <strong>Lui</strong>-Même. Et M’sieu’ Jean, savez-vous, ils sont tous</i>”⁠—leaning right in my face, the withered hand making a pitiful fist of itself⁠—“<i xml:lang="fr">ils. Sont. Des. <strong>Crapules!</strong></i>”</p>
			<p>And his ghastly and toylike wizened and minute arm would try to make a pass at their lofty lives. O <i xml:lang="fr">gouvernement français</i>, I think it was not very clever of you to put this terrible doll in La Ferté; I should have left him in Belgium with his little doll-wife if I had been You; for when governments are found dead there is always a little doll on top of them, pulling and tweaking with his little hands to get back the microscopic knife which sticks firmly in the quiet meat of their hearts.</p>
			<p>One day only did I see him happy or nearly happy⁠—when a Belgian baroness for some reason arrived, and was bowed and fed and wined by the delightfully respectful and perfectly behaved Official Captors⁠—“and I know of her in Belgium, she is a great lady, she is very powerful and she is generous; I fell on my knees before her, and implored her in the name of my wife and <i xml:lang="fr">Le Bon Dieu</i> to intercede in my behalf; and she has made a note of it, and she told me she would write the Belgian King and I will be free in a few weeks, <strong>free</strong>!”</p>
			<p>The little Machine-Fixer, I happen to know, did finally leave La Ferté⁠—for Précigne.</p>
			<p>… In the kitchen worked a very remarkable person. Who wore sabots. And sang continuously in a very subdued way to himself as he stirred the huge black kettles. We, that is to say, <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and I, became acquainted with Afrique very gradually. You did not know Afrique suddenly. You became cognisant of Afrique gradually. You were in the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i>, staring at ooze and dead trees, when a figure came striding from the kitchen lifting its big wooden feet after it rhythmically, unwinding a particoloured scarf from its waist as it came, and singing to itself in a subdued manner a jocular, and I fear, unprintable ditty concerning Paradise. The figure entered the little gate to the <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i> in a businesslike way, unwinding continuously, and made stridingly for the cabinet situated up against the stone wall which separated the promenading sexes⁠—dragging behind it on the ground a tail of ever-increasing dimensions. The cabinet reached, tail and figure parted company; the former fell inert to the limitless mud, the latter disappeared into the contrivance with a jack-in-the-box rapidity. From which contrivance the continuing ditty</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">le paradis est une maison.⁠ ⁠…</i>”</p>
			<p class="continued">—Or again, it’s a lithe pausing poise, intensely intelligent, certainly sensitive, delivering dryingly a series of sure and rapid hints that penetrate the fabric of stupidity accurately and whisperingly; dealing one after another brief and poignant instupidities, distinct and uncompromising, crisp and altogether arrowlike. The poise has a cigarette in its hand, which cigarette it has just pausingly rolled from material furnished by a number of carefully saved butts (whereof Afrique’s pockets are invariably full). Its neither old nor young, but rather keen face hoards a pair of greyish-blue witty eyes, which face and eyes are directed upon us through the open door of a little room. Which little room is in the rear of the <i xml:lang="fr">cuisine</i>; a little room filled with the inexpressibly clean and soft odour of newly cut wood. Which wood we are pretending to split and pile for kindling. As a matter of fact we are enjoying Afrique’s conversation, escaping from the bleak and profoundly muddy <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i>, and (under the watchful auspices of the Cook, who plays sentinel) drinking something approximating coffee with something approximating sugar therein. All this because the Cook thinks we’re boches and being the Cook and a boche <i xml:lang="fr">lui-même</i> is consequently peculiarly concerned for our welfare.</p>
			<p>Afrique is talking about <i xml:lang="fr">les journaux</i>, and to what prodigious pains they go to not tell the truth; or he is telling how a native stole up on him in the night armed with a spear two metres long, once on a time in a certain part of the world; or he is predicting that the Germans will march upon the French by way of Switzerland; or he is teaching us to count and swear in Arabic; or he is having a very good time in the Midi as a tinker, sleeping under a tree outside of a little town.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Afrique’s is an alert kind of mind, which has been and seen and observed and penetrated and known⁠—a bit there, somewhat here, chiefly everywhere. Its specialty being politics, in which case Afrique has had the inestimable advantage of observing without being observed⁠—until La Ferté; whereupon Afrique goes on uninterruptedly observing, recognising that a significant angle of observation has been presented to him gratis. <i xml:lang="fr">Les journaux</i> and politics in general are topics upon which Afrique can say more, without the slightest fatigue, than a book as big as my two thumbs.</p>
			<p>“Why yes, they got water, and then I gave them coffee,” Monsieur, or more properly Mynheer <i xml:lang="fr">le chef</i>, is expostulating; the <i xml:lang="fr">planton</i> is stupidly protesting that we are supposed to be upstairs; Afrique is busily stirring a huge black pot, winking gravely at us and singing softly</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Le bon Dieu, Soûl comme un cochon.⁠ ⁠…</i>”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
